


AFRICA UNITE

 Ziya po ya ya, pa pa ya pa! 
Ti da lee, na po po pu du loo! 
Ste na peh na na po po ro po! 
Africa unite: 
'Cause we're moving right out of Babylon, 
And we're going to our Father's land, yea ea. 
 
How good and how pleasant it would be before God and man, yea eah! 
To see the unification of all Africans, yeah! 
As it's been said a'ready, let it be done, yeah! 
We are the children of the Rastaman; 
We are the children of the Iyaman. 
 
So o, Africa unite: 
'Cause the children (Africa unite) wanna come home. 
Africa unite: 
'Cause we're moving right out of Babylon, yea, 
And we're grooving to our Father's land, yea ea. 
 
How good and how pleasant it would be before God and man 
To see the unification of all Rastaman, yeah. 
As it's been said a'ready, let it be done! 
I tell you who we are under the sun: 
We are the children of the Rastaman; 
We are the children of the Iyaman. 
 
So o: Africa unite, 
Afri Africa unite, yeah! 
Unite for the benefit (Africa unite) for the benefit of your people! 
Unite for it's later (Africa unite) than you think! 
Unite for the benefit (Africa unite) of my children! 
Unite for it's later (Africa uniting) than you think! 
Africa awaits (Africa unite) its creators! 
Africa awaiting (Africa uniting) its Creator! 
Africa, you're my (Africa unite) forefather cornerstone! 
Unite for the Africans (Africa uniting) abroad! 
Unite for the Africans (Africa unite) a yard! 
 


 


AFRICAN HERBSMAN

 All twinklin' lee 
Can't see the right rose when the streams abate 
The old slave men might grind slow 
But it grinds fine, yeah 
 
African herbsman, why linger on? 
Just concentrate, 'cause heaven lives on 
Greet I eth slave men will look with a scorn 
With a transplanted heart (yes, how quick they had to part) 
(... how quick they had to part) 
 
The remembrance of today 
Is the sad feelin' of tomorrow 
(... how quick ...) Oh (... part), oh yeah 
 
African herbsman, seize your time 
I'm takin' illusion on the edge of my mind 
I'm takin' losers down thru my life 
Down thru my life, yeah (yes, how quick they had to part) 
(... how quick they had to part) 
 
Dideh part, yes, they part 
In remembrance of today 
(... how quick they had to part) 
 
African herbsman, why linger on? 
Just concentrate, 'cause your heaven lives on 
Greet I eth slave men will look with a scorn 
With a transplanted heart, yes, how (... quick they have to part) 
(... how quick they have to part) 
 
In remembrance of today 
Brings sad feelings of tomorrow 
(Yes, how quick they have to ...) Lead me on, oh, Lord, I pray to you 
 
(African herbsman) (African herbsman) 
African, African herbsman ... 
 


ALL IN ONE

 Bend down low 
Let me tell you what I know now 
Bend down low 
Let me tell you what I know, what I know, what I know 
 
Long time, we no have no nice time 
Doo yoo doo dun doo, yeah, think about that 
Long, long, long, long time, we no have no nice time 
Doo yoo doo dun doo, yeah, think about that, mm 
 
One love, one heart 
Let's get together and feel alright 
One love, hear my plea, one heart 
Give thanks and praise to the Lord, and I will feel alright 
 
Simmer down, you lickin' too hot, so 
Simmer down, soon you'll get dropped, so 
Simmer down, man, you hear what I say? 
 
After he 
Breaks your heart 
Then you'll be sad, so sad 
And then your teardrops start 
I tell you, then you'll know how 
It hurts to be alone 
 
Oh, what a (... feeling ...), what a feeling (... be blue) 
Oh, what a feeling, oh, what a feeling 
(Oh, what a feeling to be blue) 
Have you ever had a lonesome feeling? 
 
This was cause thru love and affection 
This was cause thru love and affection 
This was cause thru love and affection 
 
Mm, feel them spirit 
I'm gonna put it on 
Feel them spirit 
I'm gonna put it on 
 
Yes, my friend 
We're in the streets again 
Yes, my friend 
Dem set we free again ... 
 


 


AMBUSH IN THE NIGHT

 (Ooh wee, ooh wee, ooh wa!) 
See them fighting for power (ooh wee, ooh wee, ooh wa!), 
But they know not the hour (ooh wee, ooh wee, ooh wa!),; 
So they bribing with their guns, spare parts and money, 
Trying to belittle our 
Integrity now. 
They say what we know 
Is just what they teach us; 
And we're so ignorant 
'Cause every time they can reach us (shoobe, doo wa) 
Through political strategy (shoo be, doo wa); 
They keep us hungry (shoobe, doo wa), 
And when you gonna get some food (shoobe, doo wa), 
Your brother got to be your enemy, we e ell! 
 
Ambush in the night, 
All guns aiming at me; 
Ambush in the night, 
They opened fire on me now. 
Ambush in the night, 
Protected by His Majesty. 
Ooh wee, ooh wee. Ooh wa ooh! 
(Ooh wee) Ooh wee, ooh wee (ooh wa), Ooh wa! 
Ooh wee, ooh wee, ooh wa ooh! 
Ooh wee, ooh wee, ooh wa ah! 
 
Well, what we know 
Is not what they tell us; 
We're not ignorant, I mean it, 
And they just cannot touch us; 
Through the powers of the Most I (shoobe, doo wa), 
We keep on surfacin' (shoobe, doo wa); 
Thru the powers of the Most I (shoobe, doo wa), 
We keep on survivin'. 
 
Yeah, this ambush in the night 
Planned by society; 
Ambush in the night; 
They tryin' to conquer me; 
Ambush in the night 
Anyt'ing money can bring; 
Ambush in the night 
Planned by society; 
Ambush in the night 
 



BABYLON SYSTEM

 We refuse to be 
What you wanted us to be; 
We are what we are: 
That's the way (way) it's going to be. You don't know! 
You can't educate I 
For no equal opportunity: 
(Talkin' 'bout my freedom) Talkin' 'bout my freedom, 
People freedom (freedom) and liberty! 
Yeah, we've been trodding on the winepress much too long: 
Rebel, rebel! 
Yes, we've been trodding on the winepress much too long: 
Rebel, rebel! 
 
Babylon system is the vampire, yea! (vampire) 
Suckin' the children day by day, yeah! 
Me say: de Babylon system is the vampire, falling empire, 
Suckin' the blood of the sufferers, yea ea ea ea e ah! 
Building church and university, wo o ooh, yeah! 
Deceiving the people continually, yea ea! 
Me say them graduatin' thieves and murderers; 
Look out now: they suckin' the blood of the sufferers (sufferers). 
Yea ea ea! (sufferers) 
 
Tell the children the truth; 
Tell the children the truth; 
Tell the children the truth right now! 
Come on and tell the children the truth; 
Tell the children the truth; 
Tell the children the truth; 
Tell the children the truth; 
Come on and tell the children the truth. 
 
'Cause 'cause we've been trodding on ya winepress much too long: 
Rebel, rebel! 
And we've been taken for granted much too long: 
Rebel, rebel now! 
 
(Trodding on the winepress) Trodding on the winepress (rebel): 
got to rebel, y'all (rebel)! 
We've been trodding on the winepress much too long ye e ah! (rebel) 
Yea e ah! (rebel) Yeah! Yeah! 
 
From the very day we left the shores (trodding on the winepress) 
Of our Father's land (rebel), 
We've been trampled on (rebel), 
Oh now! (we've been oppressed, yeah!) Lord, Lord, go to ... 
 


 


BAD CARD

 You a go tired fe see me face; 
Can't get me out of the race. 
Oh, man, you said I'm in your place 
And then you draw bad cyard 
A make you draw bad cyard, 
And then you draw bad cyard. 
 
Propaganda spreading over my name; 
Say you wanna bring another life to shame. 
Oh, man, you just a playing a game 
And then you draw bad cyard (draw bad cyard); 
A make you draw bad cyard (draw bad cyard); 
A make you draw bad cyard. 
 
I want to disturb my neighbour, 
'Cause I'm feelin' so right; 
I want to turn up my disco, 
Blow them to full watts tonight, eh! 
In a rub a dub style, in a rub a dub style, 
In a rub a dub style, in a rub a dub style. 
 
'Cause we guarding the palace so majestic; 
Guarding the palace so realistic! 
 
Them a go tired to see we face (oh yeah!), 
Me say them can't get we out of the race; 
Oh, man, it's just a big disgrace. 
The way you draw bad cyard (draw bad cyard); 
The way you make wrong moves (make wrong moves); 
The way you draw bad cyard (draw bad cyard); 
A make you draw bad cyard (draw bad cyard); 
A make you draw bad cyard 
In a rub a dub style, rub a dub style, 
In a rub a dub style 
 

BEND DOWN LOW

 Bend down low, let me tell you what I know now; 
Bend down low, let me tell you what I know. 
Oh! Fisherman row to reap what you sow now; 
Oh, tell you all I know (Oo oh!), 
you've got to let me go now (Oo oh!), 
And all you've got to do: 
(Bend down low) Oh yeah! Let me tell you what I know; 
Bend down low, let me tell you what I know. Oh yeah! 
 
You keep on knockin', but you can't come in. 
I get to understand you been livin' in sin, 
But if you love me, woman, walk right in. 
I've got a notch for your safety pin, 
But bend down low. 
 
 Instrumental break 
 
Keep on knockin', but you can't come in. 
I get to understand you been livin' in sin, 
But walk right in, woman, sit right down. 
I will keep on lovin' you; I play the clown. 
But bend down low, baby, let me tell you what I know; 
Bend down low, let me tell you what I know, yeah! 
Let me tell you, baby! Let me tell ya 
Knock on, babe! Just won't let ya in! 
You been livin' in sin. Knock on! 
 


BLACKMAN REDEMPTION

 Woy a, Natty Congo: 
A Dreadlock Congo I! 
Woy a, Natty Congo: 
A Blackman Redemption! Woy yo, yo oo wo oo! 
A Blackman Redemption! Woy yo, wo oo wo oo! 
 
No need no need to get jumpy; 
No need and a no need to get bumpy, 
And a no need and a no need to get bumpy; 
No nee nee nee nee nee nee nee need to get jumpy! 
 
Youth and youth agree to: 
Cool runnings; can you dig it? 
Cool runnings; yeah, one more time! A beg ya: 
Cool runnings; can you stop it? 
Cool runnings: 
Spread out, spread out, 
Spread out, spread out. 
 
Tell you about the Blackman Redemption; can you dig it? (Oh, yeah!) 
A Blackman Redemption; can you stop it? 
Oh, no! Oh, no! Oh, no! 
 
Coming from the root of King David 
Through to the line of Solomon, 
His Imperial Majesty is the Power of Authority: 
Spread out, spread out, 
Spread out, spread out, 
Spread out, spread out, 
Spread, spread out. 
 
 Instrumental break 
 
No need no need no need to get jumpy, 
And a no need and a no need to walk away. 
 
Let me tell bout ya: 
Cool runnings, can you dig it? 
Cool runnings: it's one more time we want it; 
Cool runnings; 
Cool runnings; 
Spread out, spread out, 
Spread out, spread out, 
Spread out. Spread out, spread out. 
Spread out, spread out. 
 

BRAIN WASHING

 Ooh ooh 
Old Mr. Joe, he build a house away 
On top of some hill 
Old Mr. Joe knew he had to go, so he 
He got right down and wrote bank will 
He say now, here's to mother hen 
And her chicken, Lord have mercy now 
Master, will you take a roll in the mud 
Like you know you should? 
The old barnyard, the old barnyard 
Birds and the chick, ooh wee 
Who's got to watch out for brother mongoose 
With his top hap and walking stick? 
 
It's just the poor's brain washing 
(Poor's ...) They told me a long time ago, 
It's just the poor's brain washing, ooh wee 
(Poor's brain washing) Now look at a thing like this 
 
Cinderella and her long lost fellow 
In the midnight hour, she lost her silver slipper 
Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall 
While Jack and Jill had themselves a fall 
 
It's just the poor's (... brain washing) 
And I don't need it no longer (... washing) 
It's just the poor's brain washing 
Coming through to a poor man's child, ooh wee, look at this 
 
Little Miss Muffet she sat on a tuffet 
While Little Red Riding Hood delivered her grandmom's food 
Ooh wee ooh wee 
Ooh wee, look at one more thing like this 
The cow jumping over the moon 
While the dish got jealous, he grabbed the handy spoon 
 
It's just the poor's brain washing 
And I don't need it no longer, I don't want it no longer 
I don't need it no longer (...washing) 
And I don't care for no more brain washing (... washing) ... 
 




BUFFALO SOLDIER

 Buffalo Soldier, Dreadlock Rasta: 
There was a Buffalo Soldier in the heart of America, 
Stolen from Africa, brought to America, 
Fighting on arrival, fighting for survival. 
 
I mean it, when I analyze the stench 
To me it makes a lot of sense: 
How the Dreadlock Rasta was the Buffalo Soldier, 
And he was taken from Africa, brought to America, 
Fighting on arrival, fighting for survival. 
 
Said he was a Buffalo Soldier, Dreadlock Rasta 
Buffalo Soldier in the heart of America. 
 
If you know your history, 
Then you would know where you coming from, 
Then you wouldn't have to ask me, 
Who the 'eck do I think I am. 
 
I'm just a Buffalo Soldier in the heart of America, 
Stolen from Africa, brought to America, 
Said he was fighting on arrival, fighting for survival; 
Said he was a Buffalo Soldier win the war for America. 
 
Dreadie, woy yoy yoy, woy yoy yoy yoy, 
Woy yoy yoy yoy, yoy yoy yoy yoy! 
Woy yoy yoy, woy yoy yoy yoy, 
Woy yoy yoy yoy, yoy yoy yoy yoy! 
Buffalo Soldier troddin' through the land, wo ho ooh! 
Said he wanna ran, then you wanna hand, 
Troddin' through the land, yea hea, yea ea. 
 
Said he was a Buffalo Soldier win the war for America; 
Buffalo Soldier, Dreadlock Rasta, 
Fighting on arrival, fighting for survival; 
Driven from the mainland to the heart of the Caribbean. 
 
Singing, woy yoy yoy, woy yoy yoy yoy, 
Woy yoy yoy yoy, yoy yoy yoy yoy! 
Woy yoy yoy, woy yoy yoy yoy, 
Woy yoy yoy yoy, yoy yoy yoy yoy! 
 
Troddin' through San Juan in the arms of America; 
Troddin' through Jamaica, a Buffalo Soldier 
Fighting on arrival, fighting for survival: 
Buffalo Soldier, Dreadlock Rasta. 
 
Woy yoy yoy, woy yoy yoy yoy, 
Woy yoy yoy yoy, yoy yoy yoy yoy! 
Woy yoy yoy, woy yoy yoy yoy, 
Woy yoy yoy yoy, yoy yoy yoy yoy! 
 


 


BURNIN' AND LOOTIN'

 This morning I woke up in a curfew; 
O God, I was a prisoner, too yeah! 
Could not recognize the faces standing over me; 
They were all dressed in uniforms of brutality. Eh! 
 
How many rivers do we have to cross, 
Before we can talk to the boss? Eh! 
All that we got, it seems we have lost; 
We must have really paid the cost. 
 
(That's why we gonna be) 
Burnin' and a lootin' tonight; 
(Say we gonna burn and loot) 
Burnin' and a lootin' tonight; 
(One more thing) 
Burnin' all pollution tonight; 
(Oh, yeah, yeah) 
Burnin' all illusion tonight. 
 
Oh, stop them! 
 
Give me the food and let me grow; 
Let the Roots Man take a blow. 
All them drugs gonna make you slow now; 
It's not the music of the ghetto. Eh! 
 
Weeping and a wailin' tonight; 
(Who can stop the tears?) 
Weeping and a wailin' tonight; 
(We've been suffering these long, long a years!) 
Weeping and a wailin' tonight 
(Will you say cheer?) 
Weeping and a wailin' tonight 
(But where?) 
 
Give me the food and let me grow; 
Let the Roots Man take a blow. 
I must say: all them all them drugs gonna make you slow; 
It's not the music of the ghetto. 
 
We gonna be burning and a looting tonight; 
(To survive, yeah!) 
Burning and a looting tonight; 
(Save your baby lives) 
Burning all pollution tonight; 
(Pollution, yeah, yeah!) 
Burning all illusion tonight 
(Lord a, Lord a, Lord a, Lord!) 
 
Burning and a looting tonight; 
Burning and a looting tonight; 
Burning all pollution tonight. 
 


CHANT DOWN BABYLON

 Come we go burn down Babylon one more time 
(Come we go burn down Babylon one more time); 
Come we go chant down Babylon one more time 
(Come we go chant down Babylon); 
For them soft! Yes, them soft! (ah yoy!) 
Them soft! Yes, them soft! (ah yoy!) 
So come we go chant down Babylon one more time 
(Come we go chant down Babylon)! 
 
Men see their dreams and aspiration a 
Crumble in front of their face, 
And all of their wicked intention 
To destroy the human race. 
 
And how I know and how I know and that's how I know: 
A Reggae Music, mek we chant down Babylon; 
With music, mek we chant down Babylon; 
This music, mek we chant down Babylon; 
This music, come we chant down Babylon. 
 
Come we go chant down Babylon one more time 
(Come we go chant down Babylon one more time); 
Come we go chant down Babylon one more time 
(Come we go chant down Babylon); 
For them soft! Yes, them soft! (ah yoy!) 
Them soft! Me say, Them soft! (ah yoy!) 
So come we go chant down Babylon one more time 
(Come we go chant down Babylon)! 
 
Me say, Music you're music you're the key, 
Talk to who? Please talk to me, 
Bring the voice of of the Rastaman, 
Communicating to 'cating to everyone. 
 
How I (know) how I know, how I (know) how I know 
And that's how I know: 
A Reggae Music, chant down chant down chant down Babylon, 
Chant down Babylon, chant down Babylon, 
Chant down Babylon! 
Reggae Music, chant down Babylon! 
Reggae Music, chant down Babylon! 
Reggae Music, chant down Babylon! 
Reggae Music! (chant down Babylon) 
 



COMING IN FROM THE COLD

 In this life, in this life, in this life, 
In this, oh sweet life: 
We're (we're coming in from the cold); 
We're coming in (coming in), coming in (coming in), 
coming in (coming in), coming in (coming in), 
Coming in from the cold. 
 
It's you it's you it's you I'm talkin' to 
Well, you (it's you) you (it's you) you I'm talking to now. 
Why do you look so sad and forsaken? 
When one door is closed, don't you know other is open? 
 
Would you let the system make you kill your brotherman? 
No, no, no, no, no, no! No, Dread, no! 
Would you make the system make you kill your brotherman? 
(No, Dread, no!) 
Would you make the system get on top of your head again? 
(No, Dread, no!) 
Well, the biggest man you ever did see was was just a baby. 
 
In this life (in this life), 
In this (in this life, oh sweet life): 
Coming in from the cold; 
We're coming in (coming in), coming in a (coming in), 
coming in (coming in), ooh! (coming in) 
Coming in from the cold! 
 
It's life (it's life), it's life (it's life), it's life (it's life): 
it's wa well! coming in from the cold! 
We're coming in (coming in), coming in (coming in) 
ooh (coming in), hey! (coming in), 
Coming in from the cold! 
 
It's you you you I'm talking 
Well, yes, you, bilyabong! (it's you); 
ew! you I'm talking to now. 
We e ell, why do you look so look so look so sad 
look so sad and forsaken? 
Don't you know: When one door is closed when one door is closed, 
many more is open? 
 
We e e ell, would you let the system get on top of your head again? 
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, Dread, no! 
Would you let the system make you kill your brotherman? 
No, Dread, no! 
We e e ell, would you make the system get on top of your head again? 
(No, Dread, no!) No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no! 
Well, the biggest biggest man you ever ever 
Did a see was a was a once a baby. 
 
In this life, in this life, in this life, 
In this, oh, sweet life, 
We're (coming in from the cold) from the cold! 
We're coming in (coming in), coming in (coming in), 
coming in (coming in), wo o! Yea ea eah! 
Coming in from the cold 
 
We're coming in a, coming in a, coming in a, coming in a! 
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yea ea ea eah! 
Coming in from the cold 
Coming in (coming in), coming in (coming in) 
(coming in) (coming in) 
(coming in) from the from the cold! 
 



CONCRETE JUNGLE

 No sun will shine in my day today; (no sun will shine) 
The high yellow moon won't come out to play: 
(that high yellow moon won't come out to play) 
I said (darkness) darkness has covered my light, 
(and the stage) And the stage my day into night, yeah. 
Where is the love to be found? (oo ooh ooh) 
Won't someone tell me? 
'Cause my (sweet life) life must be somewhere to be found 
(must be somewhere for me) 
Instead of concrete jungle (la la la!), 
Where the living is harder (la la!). 
 
Concrete jungle (la la la!): 
Man you got to do your (la la la!) best. Wo ooh, yeah. 
No chains around my feet, 
But I'm not free, oh ooh! 
I know I am bound here in captivity; 
G'yeah, now (never, never) I've never known happiness; 
(never, never) I've never known what sweet caress is 
Still, I'll be always laughing like a clown; 
Won't someone help me? 'Cause I (sweet life) 
I've got to pick myself from off the ground 
(must be somewhere for me), he yeah! 
In this a concrete jungle (la la la!): 
I said, what do you cry for me (la la!) now, o oh! 
Concrete jungle (la la la!), ah, won't you let me be (la la la!), now. 
Hey! Oh, now! 
 
 Guitar solo 
 
I said that life (sweet life) it must be somewhere to be found 
(must be somewhere for me) 
Oh, instead: concrete jungle (la la!) collusion (la la!) 
confusion (confusion). Eh! 
 
Concrete jungle (la la!): baby, you've got it in. 
Concrete jungle (la la la!), now. Eh! 
Concrete jungle (la la la!). 
 
What do you stand(?) for me (la la!), now? 
 



COULD YOU BE LOVED

 Could you be loved and be loved? 
Could you be loved and be loved? 
 
Don't let them fool ya, 
Or even try to school ya! Oh, no! 
We've got a mind of our own, 
So go to hell if what you're thinking is not right! 
Love would never leave us alone, 
A yin the darkness there must come out to light. 
 
Could you be loved and be loved? 
Could you be loved, wo now! and be loved? 
 
(The road of life is rocky and you may stumble too, 
So while you point your fingers someone else is judging you) 
Love your brotherman! 
(Could you be could you be could you be loved? 
Could you be could you be loved? 
Could you be could you be could you be loved? 
Could you be could you be loved?) 
 
Don't let them change ya, oh! 
Or even rearrange ya! Oh, no! 
We've got a life to live. 
They say: only only 
only the fittest of the fittest shall survive 
Stay alive! Eh! 
 
Could you be loved and be loved? 
Could you be loved, wo now! and be loved? 
 
(You ain't gonna miss your water until your well runs dry; 
No matter how you treat him, the man will never be satisfied.) 
Say something! (Could you be could you be could you be loved? 
Could you be could you be loved?) 
Say something! Say something! 
(Could you be could you be could you be loved?) 
Say something! (Could you be could you be loved?) 
Say something! Say something! (Say something!) 
Say something! Say something! (Could you be loved?) 
Say something! Say something! Reggae, reggae! 
Say something! Rockers, rockers! 
Say something! Reggae, reggae! 
Say something! Rockers, rockers! 
Say something! (Could you be loved?) 
Say something! Uh! 
Say something! Come on! 
Say something! (Could you be could you be could you be loved?) 
Say something! (Could you be could you be loved?) 
Say something! (Could you be could you be could you be loved?) 
Say something! (Could you be could you be loved?) 
 


 

 


CRY TO ME

 (Ooh ooh, hoo hoo hoo! Ooh ooh hoo hoo!) 
Cry to me, now; 
You gonna cry to me, yeah! 
You're gonna walk back through the heartaches; 
You're gonna walk back through the pain; 
(Shed those) Shed those lonely teardrops: 
The reaction of your cheating game. 
 
You got to cry to me, now! 
You're gonna cry cry cry to me, yeah! Yeah! 
Lord knows how I get from the heartaches; 
Lord that leadeth me, yeah! 
And now I'm by the still water. 
You've got to cry to me, yea ea eah! 
You gonna cry to me now; 
You've got to cry cry cry to me, yeah! 
You're gonna spend those lonely hours. 
You're gonna shed those lonely tears; 
(Walk back) Walk back through the heartaches; 
(Walk back) Walk back through the pain; 
(Shed those) Shed those lonely teardrops: 
The reaction of your cheating game. 
 
You're gonna to cry to me, now! 
You got to cry cry cry to me, yeah! 
Saying, (don't know) don't know know how I get from the heartaches; 
(Lord that) Lord that leadeth me, yeah eah eah! 
(Shed those lonely teardrops) Now I'm by the still water; 
(The reaction of your cheating game) Gonna cry to me now, hey! 
(Cry) Cry 
(Cry) Cry 
 


DON'T ROCK THE BOAT

 Huh, please don't you rock my boat 
'Cause I don't want my boat to be rockin' anyhow 
Please don't you rock my boat, no 
'Cause I don't want my boat to be rockin' 
 
I'm tellin' you that, oh, ooh aah, I like it a like a this 
Can you miss? 
And you should know, ooh aah, when I like it a like a this 
Am I really it? Ooh yeah 
You satis satis satisfy my soul, morning time 
Evening cold, fy my soul 
Yes, I've been a tellin' you, bake me the sweetest cakes 
I'm happy inside all the time 
Oh, can't you see what you've done for me? Yeah 
 
You make me feel like when we bend them new corners 
We feel like sweepstake winners, yeah 
When we bend them new corners 
We feel like sweepstake winners 
 
And I said, oh, ooh aah, I like it a like a this 
Yes, I do 
And you should know, ooh aah, when I like it a like a this 
I've got it, just can't miss, ooh 
Satis satisfy my soul, darlin' 
Make me love you in the morning time, yeah 
If ever I treated you bad, make it up to me one time 
'Cause I'm happy inside all the time 
I want you beside me, yeah, to be mine 
 
One thing you've got to do, is when a we holding hands together 
You've got to know that we love, a love each other, yeah 
And if every time you should walk away from me now 
Uh, you'll now I need your sympathy, yeah 
 
Can you see? Do you believe me? 
Oh, darlin', darlin', I'm callin', callin' 
Satisfy my soul, satisfy my soul 
Never, never, never give it up now 
 
All in the same boat 
Rockin' on the same route 
We gotta get together, join each other 
And can't you see what I've got for you? Yeah 
 
 
I'm happy, happy, happy, happy, happy, and not you can turn me blue now 
Come a little closer, satisfy my ... 
 


DUPPY CONQUEROR

 Yes, me friend, me friend 
Dem set me free again 
Yes, me friend, me friend 
Me deh 'pon street again 
 
The bars 
 
Yes, I've been accused 
Wrongly abused now 
But through the powers of the Most High 
They've got to turn me loose 
 
Yes, me friend, me good friend 
Dem set me free again, mm 
Yes, me friend 
Dem turn me loose again 
 
(Yes, me friend) Me friend, me friend, me friend 
We deh a street again 
Yes, me friend, me friend, me friend 
Dem set me free again 
 


 

Excuse me while I light my spliff; (spliff) 
Good God, I gotta take a lift: (lift) 
From reality I just can't drift; (drift) 
That's why I am staying with this riff. (riff) 
 
Take it easy (easy skankin');; 
Lord, I take it easy! (easy skankin');; 
Take it easy (easy skankin');; 
Got to take it easy (easy skankin');. 
See: we're takin' it easy (ooh wah da da da) 
We taking it slow, (ooh wah da da da) 
Takin' it easy (easy); 
Got to take it slow (slow slow) 
So take it easy (easy skankin' da da da da da da) 
Wo oh, take it easy (easy skankin'); 
Take it easy (easy skankin' da da da da da da) 
Take it easy. (easy skankin'); 
 
Excuse me while I light my spliff; (spliff) 
Oh, God, I gotta take a lift: (lift) 
From reality I just can't drift; (drift) 
That's why I am staying with this riff. (riff) 
 
Take it easy (takin' it easy); 
Got to take it easy (takin' it slow); 
Take it easy (takin' it easy); 
Skanky, take it easy (takin' it slow). 
 
Tell you what: 
herb for my wine; (ooh wa da da da) 
Honey for my strong drink; (ooh wa da da da) 
Herb for my wine; (ooh wa da da da) 
Honey for my strong drink. 
 
I shake it easy (takin' it easy); 
Skanky, take it easy (skankin' it slow); 
Take it (takin' it easy) easy; 
Take it (skankin' it slow) easy; 
Take it easy (takin' it easy); 
Oh oh ooh! (skankin' it slow); 
Little bit easier (takin' it easy); 
Skanky, take it easy (skankin' it slow). 
Take it easy! Take it easy! Take it easy! 
 

 


 


EXODUS

 Exodus: Movement of Jah people! Oh oh oh, yea eah! 
....... 
Men and people will fight ya down (Tell me why!) 
When ya see Jah light. (Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha!) 
Let me tell you if you're not wrong; (Then, why?) 
Everything is all right. 
So we gonna walk all right! through de roads of creation: 
We the generation (Tell me why!) 
(Trod through great tribulation) trod through great tribulation. 
 
Exodus, all right! Movement of Jah people! 
Oh, yeah! O oo, yeah! All right! 
Exodus: Movement of Jah people! Oh, yeah! 
 
Yeah yeah yeah, well! 
Uh! Open your eyes and look within: 
Are you satisfied (with the life you're living)? Uh! 
We know where we're going, uh! 
We know where we're from. 
We're leaving Babylon, 
We're going to our Father land. 
 
2, 3, 4: Exodus: movement of Jah people! Oh, yeah! 
(Movement of Jah people!) Send us another brother Moses! 
(Movement of Jah people!) From across the Red Sea! 
(Movement of Jah people!) Send us another brother Moses! 
(Movement of Jah people!) From across the Red Sea! 
Movement of Jah people! 
 
 Instrumental break 
 
Exodus, all right! Oo oo ooh! Oo ooh! 
Movement of Jah people! Oh, yeah! 
Exodus! 
Exodus! All right! 
Exodus! Now, now, now, now! 
Exodus! 
Exodus! Oh, yea ea ea ea ea ea eah! 
Exodus! 
Exodus! All right! 
Exodus! Uh uh uh uh! 
 
Move! Move! Move! Move! Move! Move! 
 
Open your eyes and look within: 
Are you satisfied with the life you're living? 
We know where we're going; 
We know where we're from. 
We're leaving Babylon, y'all! 
We're going to our Father's land. 
 
Exodus, all right! Movement of Jah people! 
Exodus: movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
 
Move! Move! Move! Move! Move! Move! Move! 
 
Jah come to break downpression, 
Rule equality, 
Wipe away transgression, 
Set the captives free. 
 
Exodus, all right, all right! 
Movement of Jah people! Oh, yeah! 
Exodus: movement of Jah people! Oh, now, now, now, now! 
Movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
 
Move! Move! Move! Move! Move! Move! Uh uh uh uh! 
Move(ment of Jah people)! 
Move(ment of Jah people)! 
Move(ment of Jah people)! 
Move(ment of Jah people)! Movement of Jah people! 
Move(ment of Jah people)! 
Move(ment of Jah people)! 
Movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
Movement of Jah people! 
 


 


FOREVER LOVING JAH

 Wo o o o! Ya ya ya ya ya ya ya! Woy oh! 
Yeah yeah yeah, yeah yeah, yeah yeah yeah yeah! Oh! 
(We'll be forever loving Jah; 
We'll be forever loving Jah!) 
 
Some they say see them walking up the street; 
They say we're going wrong to all the people we meet; 
But a we won't worry, we won't shed no tears: 
We found a way to cast away the fears, 
Forever, yeah! 
 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) We'll be forever! 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) Forever, yes, and forever! 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) There'll be no end. 
 
So, old man river, don't cry for me; 
A have got a running stream of love you see. 
So, no matter what stages oh stages 
Stages stages they put us through, 
We'll never be blue 
No matter what rages, oh rages, 
Changes rages they put us through, 
We'll never be blue: 
We'll be forever, yeah! 
 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) We'll be forever! 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) Forever, and ever, yes, and forever! 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) 'Cause there is no end. 
 
'Cause only a fool lean upon 
Lean upon his own misunderstanding, oh ho, oh, yeah! 
And then what has been hidden 
From the wise and the prudent 
Been revealed to the babe and the suckling 
In everyt'ing, in every way, I say, yeah! 
 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) We'll be forever! 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) 
 
'Cause just like a tree planted planted by the rivers of water 
That bringeth forth fruits bringeth forth fruits in due season; 
Everything in life got its purpose, 
Find its reason in every season, 
Forever, yeah! 
 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) We'll be forever! 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) On and on and on! 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) We'll be forever, yes, yes 
we'll be forever. 
(We'll be forever loving Jah) 
 





FUSSING AND FIGHTING

 Why's this fussing and a fighting? 
I wanna know, Lord, I wanna know 
Why's this bumping and a boring? 
I wanna know, Lord, I wanna know now 
 
We should really love each other (love each other) 
In peace and harmony (peace and harmony), ooh 
Instead, we're fussing and fighting (fussing and fighting) 
And them workin' iniquity (... iniquity) 
 
Why's this fussing and a fighting? 
I wanna know, Lord, I wanna know (... know), I wanna know now 
Why's this cheating and backbiting? 
(I wanna know ...) I wanna know, oh, Lord, I wanna know now 
 
(Stop your fussing and fighting, stop your fussing and fighting) 
 
(Stop your fussing and fighting, stop your fussing and fighting) 
 
We should really love each other (love each other) 
In peace and harmony (peace and harmony) 
Instead, instead, we're fussing and fighting (fussing and fighting) 
Like we ain't supposed to be (... supposed to be), tell me why 
 
Why's this fussing and a fighting? 
I wanna know, Lord, I wanna know, someone, please 
Why's this (... bumping and ...) bumping and boring? 
(I wanna ...) I wanna know (... I wanna know), Lord, tell me now ... 


 


GET UP, STAND UP

 Get up, stand up: stand up for your rights! 
Get up, stand up: stand up for your rights! 
Get up, stand up: stand up for your rights! 
Get up, stand up: don't give up the fight! 
 
Preacherman, don't tell me, 
Heaven is under the earth. 
I know you don't know 
What life is really worth. 
It's not all that glitters is gold; 
'Alf the story has never been told: 
So now you see the light, eh! 
Stand up for your rights. Come on! 
 
Get up, stand up: stand up for your rights! 
Get up, stand up: don't give up the fight! 
Get up, stand up: stand up for your rights! 
Get up, stand up: don't give up the fight! 
 
Most people think, 
Great God will come from the skies, 
Take away everything 
And make everybody feel high. 
But if you know what life is worth, 
You will look for yours on earth: 
And now you see the light, 
You stand up for your rights. Jah! 
 
Get up, stand up! (Jah, Jah!) 
Stand up for your rights! (Oh hoo!) 
Get up, stand up! (Get up, stand up!) 
Don't give up the fight! (Life is your right!) 
Get up, stand up! (So we can't give up the fight!) 
Stand up for your rights! (Lord, Lord!) 
Get up, stand up! (Keep on struggling on!) 
Don't give up the fight! (Yeah!) 
 
We sick an' tired of a your ism skism game 
Dyin' 'n' goin' to heaven in a Jesus' name, Lord. 
We know when we understand: 
Almighty God is a living man. 
You can fool some people sometimes, 
But you can't fool all the people all the time. 
So now we see the light (What you gonna do?), 
We gonna stand up for our rights! (Yeah, yeah, yeah!) 
 
So you better: 
Get up, stand up! (In the morning! Git it up!) 
Stand up for your rights! (Stand up for our rights!) 
Get up, stand up! 
Don't give up the fight! (Don't give it up, don't give it up!) 
Get up, stand up! (Get up, stand up!) 
Stand up for your rights! (Get up, stand up!) 
Get up, stand up! ( ... ) 
Don't give up the fight! (Get up, stand up!) 
Get up, stand up! ( ... ) 
Stand up for your rights! 
Get up, stand up! 
Don't give up the fight! 
 

GIVE THANKS AND PRAISES

 Give thanks and praises to the Most I (Jah!); 
Give thanks and praises so high (so high). 
He will not deceive us my brethren; 
He will only lead us again (again): 
Oh, take that veil from off of your eyes; 
Look into the future of realize. 
 
Noah had three sons, Ham, Shem and Japhet (Ham, Shem and Japhet); 
And in Ham is known to be the Prophet. 
Glory to Jah, the Prophet is come (through all these ages); 
Glory to Jah, the Prophet has come (through all these stages). 
When my soul was hurtin' deep within, 
And I'm worrying to be free, desperately, yeah. 
So guide and protect I'n'I, O Jah Jah, 
Through all these ages; 
Guide and protect I'n'I, O Jah Jah, 
Through all these stages. 
 
Rastafari is his Name (Jah!) 
Rastafari is his Name (Jah!). 
If Jah didn't love I (love I), 
If I didn't love I (love I), 
If Jah didn't love I (love I), 
If I didn't love I, 
Would I be around today? 
Would I be around to say: 
 
Give thanks and praises, give thanks and praises; 
Give thanks and praises, give thanks and praises; 
Give thanks and praises, give thanks and praises. 
 


 


GUILTINESS

 Guiltiness (talkin' 'bout guiltiness) 
Pressed on their conscience. Oh yeah. 
And they live their lives (they live their lives) 
On false pretence everyday 
each and everyday. Yeah. 
 
These are the big fish 
Who always try to eat down the small fish, 
just the small fish. 
I tell you what: they would do anything 
To materialize their every wish. Oh yeah eah eah eah. 
 
Say: Woe to the downpressors: 
They'll eat the bread of sorrow! 
Woe to the downpressors: 
They'll eat the bread of sad tomorrow! 
Woe to the downpressors: 
They'll eat the bread of sorrow! 
Oh, yeah eah! Oh, yeah eah eah eah! 
 
Guiltiness 
Pressed on their conscience. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. 
These are the big fish 
Who always try to eat down the small fish, 
just the small fish. 
 
I tell you what: they would do anything 
To materialize their every wish. Oh, yeah eah eah eah eah eah. 
 
But: Woe to the downpressors: 
They'll eat the bread of sorrow! 
Woe to the downpressors: 
They'll eat the bread of sad tomorrow! 
Woe to the downpressors: 
They'll eat the bread of sad tomorrow! 
Oh, yeah eah! Oh yeah e e e e e! 
 
Guiltiness. Oh yeah. Ah! 
They'll eat the bread of sorrow everyday 
 



I KNOW

 Wo, man, deh you are! 
 
When the race gets hard to run, 
It means you just can't take the pace. 
When it's time to have your fun, 
You find the tears run on down through your face, 
Then you stop and think a little: 
Are you the victim of the system? 
Anyday now they gon' let you down; 
Remember, Natty will be there 
To see you through. 
 
(I) And ain't it good to know (know) now: 
Jah will be waiting there. 
(I) Ain't it doggone good to know (know) , you all; 
Jah will be waiting there. 
Wait in Summer, wait in Spring, 
Wait in Autumn, Winter thing, 
[*Tribe] goes up, all the tribe goes down: 
Bring my children from the end of d'earth 
 
Many a time I sit and wonder why 
This race so so very hard to run, 
Then I say to my soul: take courage, 
Battle to be won, 
Like a ship that's tossed and driven, 
Battered by the angry sea, yea eah! 
Say the tide of time was raging; 
Don't let the fury fall on me, no, no! 
 
(I) 'Cause I know (know) know: 
Jah will be waiting there; 
(I) Ain't it good to know (know) now: 
Jah will be waiting there. Wo oo o oo o! Ooh, yeah! 
Lost and found, who speak I give; 
Lost and found, who speak I give; 
Speak I give, lost and found. 
Lost and found, who speak I give; 
Lost and found, who speak I give 
 



 


I SHOT THE SHERIFF

 (I shot the sheriff 
But I didn't shoot no deputy, oh no! Oh! 
I shot the sheriff 
But I didn't shoot no deputy, ooh, ooh, oo ooh.) 
Yeah! All around in my home town, 
They're tryin' to track me down; 
They say they want to bring me in guilty 
For the killing of a deputy, 
For the life of a deputy. 
But I say: 
 
Oh, now, now. Oh! 
(I shot the sheriff.) the sheriff. 
(But I swear it was in selfdefence.) 
Oh, no! (Ooh, ooh, oo oh) Yeah! 
I say: I shot the sheriff Oh, Lord! 
(And they say it is a capital offence.) 
Yeah! (Ooh, ooh, oo oh) Yeah! 
 
Sheriff John Brown always hated me, 
For what, I don't know: 
Every time I plant a seed, 
He said kill it before it grow 
He said kill them before they grow. 
And so: 
 
Read it in the news: 
(I shot the sheriff.) Oh, Lord! 
(But I swear it was in self defence.) 
Where was the deputy? (Oo oo oh) 
I say: I shot the sheriff, 
But I swear it was in selfdefence. (Oo oh) Yeah! 
 
Freedom came my way one day 
And I started out of town, yeah! 
All of a sudden I saw sheriff John Brown 
Aiming to shoot me down, 
So I shot I shot I shot him down and I say: 
If I am guilty I will pay. 
 
(I shot the sheriff,) 
But I say (But I didn't shoot no deputy), 
I didn't shoot no deputy (oh, no oh), oh no! 
(I shot the sheriff.) I did! 
But I didn't shoot no deputy. Oh! (Oo oo ooh) 
 
Reflexes had got the better of me 
And what is to be must be: 
Every day the bucket a go a well, 
One day the bottom a go drop out, 
One day the bottom a go drop out. 
I say: 
 
I I I I shot the sheriff. 
Lord, I didn't shot the deputy. Yeah! 
I I (shot the sheriff) 
But I didn't shoot no deputy, yeah! No, yeah! 
 

IS THIS LOVE

 I wanna love you and treat you right; 
I wanna love you every day and every night: 
We'll be together with a roof right over our heads; 
We'll share the shelter of my single bed; 
We'll share the same room, yeah! for Jah provide the bread. 
Is this love is this love is this love 
Is this love that I'm feelin'? 
Is this love is this love is this love 
Is this love that I'm feelin'? 
I wanna know wanna know wanna know now! 
I got to know got to know got to know now! 
 
I I I I I I I I I I'm willing and able, 
So I throw my cards on your table! 
I wanna love you I wanna love and treat love and treat you right; 
I wanna love you every day and every night: 
We'll be together, yeah! with a roof right over our heads; 
We'll share the shelter, yeah, oh now! of my single bed; 
We'll share the same room, yeah! for Jah provide the bread. 
 
Is this love is this love is this love 
Is this love that I'm feelin'? 
Is this love is this love is this love 
Is this love that I'm feelin'? 
Wo o o oah! Oh yes, I know; yes, I know yes, I know now! 
Yes, I know; yes, I know yes, I know now! 
 
I I I I I I I I I I'm willing and able, 
So I throw my cards on your table! 
See: I wanna love ya, I wanna love and treat ya 
love and treat ya right. 
I wanna love you every day and every night: 
We'll be together, with a roof right over our heads! 
We'll share the shelter of my single bed; 
We'll share the same room, yeah! Jah provide the bread. 
We'll share the shelter of my single bed 
 

 


JAMMIN'

 Ooh, yeah! All right! 
We're jammin': 
I wanna jam it wid you. 
We're jammin', jammin', 
And I hope you like jammin', too. 
 
Ain't no rules, ain't no vow, we can do it anyhow: 
I'n'I will see you through, 
'Cos everyday we pay the price with a little sacrifice, 
Jammin' till the jam is through. 
 
We're jammin' 
To think that jammin' was a thing of the past; 
We're jammin', 
And I hope this jam is gonna last. 
 
No bullet can stop us now, we neither beg nor we won't bow; 
Neither can be bought nor sold. 
We all defend the right; Jah Jah children must unite: 
Your life is worth much more than gold. 
 
We're jammin' (jammin', jammin', jammin'); 
And we're jammin' in the name of the Lord; 
We're jammin' (jammin', jammin', jammin');, 
We're jammin' right straight from Yah. 
 
Yeh! Holy Mount Zion; 
Holy Mount Zion: 
Jah sitteth in Mount Zion 
And rules all creation. 
 
Yeah, we're we're jammin' (wotcha wa), 
Wotcha wa wa wa, we're jammin' (wotcha wa), 
See, I wanna jam it wid you 
We're jammin' (jammin', jammin', jammin'); 
I'm jammed: I hope you're jammin', too. 
 
Jam's about my pride and truth I cannot hide 
To keep you satisfied. 
True love that now exist is the love I can't resist, 
So jam by my side. 
 
We're Jammin' (jammin', jammin', jammin');, yeah eah eah! 
I wanna jam it wid you. 
We're jammin', we're jammin', we're jammin', we're jammin', 
We're jammin', we're jammin', we're jammin', we're jammin'; 
Hope you like jammin', too. 
We're jammin', we're jammin' (jammin');, 
We're jammin', we're jammin' (jammin');. 
I wanna (I wanna jam it wid you) I wanna 
I wanna jam wid you now. 
Jammin', jammin' (hope you like jammin' too). 
Eh eh! I hope you like jammin', I hope you like jammin', 
'Cause (I wanna jam it wid you). I wanna ... wid you. 
I like I hope you I hope you like jammin', too. 
I wanna jam it; 
I wanna jam it. 
 


JOHNNY WAS

 (Wo o o o! Wo o o o! Wooo!) 
Woman hold her head and cry, 
'Cause her son had been shot down in the street and died 
From a stray bullet. 
 
Woman hold her head and cry; 
Explaining to her was a passerby 
Who saw the woman cry (cry) 
Wondering how can she work it out, 
Now she knows that the wages of sin is death, yeah! 
Gift of Jah is life. (life) 
She cried: Ah um, I I know! 
 Johnny was a good man, I I know! (never did a thing wrong) 
 Johnny was a good, good, good, good, good, good, good, good, 
good, good, good man , (Johnny was good man) 
she cried she crie ie ie ie ie ie ie ied! 
 
Wo ooh! Woman hold her head and cry, 
As her son had been shot down in the street and died 
Just because of the system. (system) 
 
Woman hold her head and cry; 
Comforting her I was passing by. 
She complained, then she cry: 
Oh ooh wo ah, cry (ah ah), yeah, I know now (ah ah), 
no I know, I know now: (Johnny was a good man) 
Said I know, mm mm mm mm mm. (Never did a thing wrong) 
Ah! Ah! (Johnny was a good man) 
Can a woman tender care, she cried, (Never did a thing wrong) 
Cease towards the child she bear? (Johnny was a good man) 
Wo ho ho ooh! Woman cry, woman (Never did a thing wrong) 
She cried, wo oh! She cried, yeah! (Johnny was a good man) 
Can a woman tender care 
Cease towards the child she bear? (Never did a thing wrong) 
Wo now, cry! (Johnny was a good man) 
 


 


JUMP NYABINGHI

 (Hallelu Jah!) 
(Hallelu Jah!) 
 
Love to see when ya move in the rhythm; 
I love to see, when you're dancin' from within! 
It gives great joy to feel such sweet togetherness, 
Everyone doin' and they're doing their best 
Huh, it remind I of the days in Jericho, 
When we troddin' down Jericho walls: 
These are the days when we'll trod t'rough Babylon, (na na, na na) 
Gonna trod until Babylon falls. 
 
Sing your song yah! 
(Jump, jump, jump,) Nyabinghi! ... 
(Jump, jump, jump,) Nyabinghi! 
(Jump, jump, jump,) Nyabinghi! ... 
(Jump, jump, jump,) Nyabinghi! 
 
We've got the herb (got it!), 
We've got the herb (got it!), 
We've got the herb (got it!), 
So hand I the suru board, 
'Cause most of all we ain't got nothing to lose. We e e ey! 
 
(Jump, jump, jump,) Nyabinghi! 
(Jump, jump, jump,) Nyabinghi! A little bit loud[er]! 
(Jump, jump, jump,) Nyabinghi! 
(Jump, jump, jump, Nyabinghi!) 
 
Love to see when ya groove with the riddim, 
'Cause I love to when you're dancing from within! 
It gives great joy to see such sweet togetherness, 
'Cause everyone's doin' and they're doing their best. 
'Cause it remind me of the days in Jericho 
When we troddin' down Jericho walls! 
These are the days when we'll trod through Babylon, 
We keep on troddin' until Babylon falls! 
 
(Jump, jump, jump,) Nyabinghi! 
(Jump, jump, jump,) Nyabinghi! 
(Jump, jump, jump,) Nyabinghi! 
 


 
KAYA

 Wake up and turn me loose 
Wake up and turn me loose 
Wake up and turn me loose 
For the rain is falling 
 
Got to have kaya now 
Got to have kaya now 
Got to have kaya now 
For the rain is falling 
 
I'm so high, I even touch the sky 
Above the falling rain 
I feel so good in my neighbourhood, so 
Here I come again 
 
Got to have kaya now 
Got to have kaya now 
Got to have kaya now 
For the rain is falling 
 
Feelin' irie I 
Feelin' irie I 
Feelin' irie I 
'Cause I have some kaya now 
 
I feel so high, I even touch the sky 
Above the falling rain 
I feel so good in my neighbourhood, so 
Here I come again 
 
Got to have kaya now 
Got to have kaya now 
Got to have kaya now, Lord 
For the rain is falling 
 
(Kaya now, kaya, kaya) Huh 
 

KEEP ON MOVING

 Lord, I've got to keep on moving 
Lord, I've got to get on down 
Lord, I've got to keep on moving 
Where I can't be found 
Lord, they're coming after me 
 
I've been accused for the killin' 
Lord knows I didn't do 
For hangin' me, they are willin', yeah, yeah 
And that's why I've got to get on thru 
Lord, they're coming after me (a one more time) 
 
(I say) Lord, I've got to keep on moving 
Lord, I've got to get on down 
Lord, I've got to keep on moving 
Where I can't be found 
Lord, they're coming after me 
 
(Now, listen) I've got two boys and a woman 
They're just gonna suffer now 
Lord, forgive me for not goin' back 
But I'll be there anyhow 
I'll be there anyhow (one more time) 
 
(I say) Lord, I've got to keep on moving 
Lord, I've got to get on down 
Lord, I've got to keep on moving 
Where I can't be found 
Lord, they're coming after me 
 
Now, maybe someday I'll find a piece of land 
Somewhere not by near anyone 
Then I'll send for my love, love, love, love, sweet woman 
And my two grown up son 
My two grown up son (yeah, yeah ...) 
 
(I say now) Lord I've got to keep on moving ... 
 


 

LIVELY UP YOURSELF

 Lively up yourself and don't be no drag 
Lively up yourself, 'cause this is the other bag 
Hey, lively up yourself and don't be no drag 
You lively up yourself, dig it, the other bag 
 
Hey, you rock so, you rock so, like you never did before 
You dip so, you dip so, and you can dip thru my door 
You come so, you come so, oh yeah, like I do adore you 
You skank so, you skank so, and a I can assure you 
 
You can lively up yourself and don't be no drag 
Hey, you lively up yourself, can you dig it? 
 
Hey (you rock so, you rock so), like you never did before 
You dip so, you dip so, can you dig it? 
 
You lively up yourself and don't be no drag 
You lively up yourself, 'cause this is the other bag 
Hey, lively up yourself 
 
Lively up yourself, other bag 
Can you dig it? Can you dig it? ... 
 


 


MIDNIGHT RAVERS

 Do do do. Do do do. Do do do. 
(You can't tell the woman from the man) 
No, I say you can't, 'cause they're dressed in the same pollution; 
(dressed in the same pollution) 
Their mind is confused with confusion 
With their problems since they've no solution: 
They become the midnight ravers. 
 
Someone say: 
(Please, don't let me down!) 
Oh, please, don't let me ee ya bab, oh, please don't let me down! 
(Midnight) Midnight ravers! (ravers) Midnight ravers! 
(Please don't) Oh, please, please, 
don't let me down, down, down, down, down! 
Don't let me down; 
Don't let me down. 
 
I see ten thousand chariots (ah ah ah ah) 
And they coming without horses; (coming without horses) 
The riders they cover their face, (ah ah ah ah) 
So you couldn't make them out in smoky place 
(make them out in smoky places) 
In that musical stampede, where everyone is doing their thing. 
Musical stampede people swingin'; 
Musical stampede. Someone say: 
People, ride on! (keep a ridin'!) 
(keep a ridin'!) Ride on! 
(keep a ridin'!) Midnight ravers! 
People, ride on! (keep a ridin'!) 
(keep a ridin'!) Ride on! 
(keep a ridin'!) Midnight ravers! 
 
I can't tell my woman from the man: 
She is dressed in the same pollution; (dressed in the same pollution) 
Her mind is confused with confusion: 
To my problem seems there's never never no solution! 
 
I've become a night life raver 
And I'm beggin' you, (please) please, please 
oh, beel ya ba ba please don't ya let me down! 
 
(Night life ravers) Night life ravers! Night life ravers! 
Oh, please, please, please, please, don't let me down. 
Don't let me down; 
Don't let me down! 
 
I see ten thousand chariots (ah ah ah ah) 
And they coming without horses; (coming without horses) 
The riders they cover their face, (ah ah ah ah) 
So you couldn't make them out in smoky place 
In that musical stampede, oh! 
It's the musical stampede. Ride on! 
It's the musical stampede, some preacher say! 
People ride on! (keep a ridin'!) 
(keep a ridin'!) Ride on! 
(keep a ridin'!) Midnight ravers! 
A ride on! (keep a ridin'!) 
(keep a ridin'!) Ride on! 
(keep a ridin'!) Midnight ravers! 
Ride on, y'all! (keep a ridin'!) 
(keep a ridin'!) Ride on! 
(keep a ridin'!) Midnight ravers! 
Ride on! (keep a ridin'!) 
(keep a ridin'!) Don't let me down, midnight ravers! 
(keep a ridin'!) 
Midnight ravers, don't let me down! (keep a ridin'!) 
Don't let me down don't let me down! (keep a ridin'!) 
Well, I'm comin'! 
I got too much talkin' 
 



MISTY MORNING

 Misty mornin', don't see no sun; 
I know you're out there somewhere having fun. 
There is one mystery yea ea eah I just can't express: 
To give your more, to receive your less. 
One of my good friend said, in a reggae riddim, 
 Don't jump in the water, if you can't swim. 
The power of philosophy yea ea eah floats through my head 
Light like a feather, heavy as lead; 
Light like a feather, heavy as lead, yeah. 
 
See no sun! Oh. 
Time has come, I want you 
I want you to straighten out my tomorrow! Uh. 
I want I want I want you (tomorrow). 
Oh, wo ah ah ah ah ah ah ah ah! 
I want you to straighten out my (tomorrow)! 
 
Misty (morning) mornin', don't see no sun; 
I know you're out there somewhere having fun. 
Mysteries I just can't express: 
How can you ever give your more to receive your less? 
Like my good friend said, in a reggae riddim: 
 You can't jump you can't jump in the water, if you can't swim. 
 
I want you (I want you) I want you to straighten out my today 
My tomorrow my my my my my 
(I want you to straighten out my tomorrow). 
On a misty morning, uh! (I want you to straighten out my tomorrow). 
Oh oh oh oh oh oh! 
(I want you to straighten out my tomorrow) 
Straighten out my tomorrow my tomorrow! Need some straightenin' out! 
(I want you to straighten out my tomorrow) 
Mist! Mm. (I want) Mist! (you to straighten out my tomorrow) 
Misty! Oh! (I want you to straighten out my tomorrow) 
 


NATTY DREAD

 Dread, Natty Dread now, (Natty Dread) 
Dreadlock Congo Bongo I. (Natty Dread) 
Natty Dreadlock in a Babylon: (Natty Dread) 
A dreadlock Congo Bongo I. (Natty Dread) 
Eh! Children get your culture (Natty Dreadlock) 
And don't stay there and gesture, a ah, (Natty Dreadlock) 
Or the battle will be hotter (Natty Dreadlock) 
And you won't get no supper. (Natty Dreadlock) 
 
Natty Dread, Natty Dread, now; (Natty Dread) 
A dreadlock Congo Bongo I. (Natty Dread) 
Natty Dreadlock in a Babylon (Natty Dread) 
Roots Natty, Roots Natty! (Natty Dread) 
 
Then I walk up the first street, (Natty Dreadlock) 
And then I walk up the second street to see. (Natty Dreadlock) 
Then I trod on through third street, (Natty Dreadlock) 
And then I talk to some Dread on fourth street. (Natty Dreadlock) 
Natty Dreadlock in a fifth street, (Natty Dreadlock) 
And then I skip one fence to sixth street. (Natty Dreadlock) 
I've got to reach seventh street: (Natty Dreadlock) 
Natty Dreadlock Bingy Bongo I (Natty Dread) 
Natty dread, Natty Dread, now, (Natty Dread) 
Roots Natty Congo I. (Natty Dread) 
 
Oh, Natty, Natty, 
Natty 21,000 miles away from home, yeah! 
Oh, Natty, Natty, 
And that's a long way 
For Natty to be from home. 
 
Don't care what the world seh; (Natty Dread) 
I'n'I couldn't never go astray. (Natty Dread) 
Just like a bright and sunny day: (Natty Dread) 
Oh, we're gonna have things our way. (Natty Dread) 
Natty Dread, Natty Dreadlock, (Natty Dreadlock) 
Dreadlock Congo Bongo I. (Natty Dreadlock) 
Don't care what the world seh; (Natty Dreadlock) 
I'n'I gonna have things our way. (Natty Dreadlock) 
If a egg Natty in a the red (Natty Dreadlock) 
If a egg Natty in a the red. (Natty Dreadlock) 
Natty Dread, Natty Dreadlock. 
 


NATURAL MYSTIC

 There's a natural mystic blowing through the air; 
If you listen carefully now you will hear. 
This could be the first trumpet, might as well be the last: 
Many more will have to suffer, 
Many more will have to die don't ask me why. 
 
Things are not the way they used to be, 
I won't tell no lie; 
One and all have to face reality now. 
'Though I've tried to find the answer to all the questions they ask. 
'Though I know it's impossible to go livin' through the past 
Don't tell no lie. 
 
There's a natural mystic blowing through the air 
Can't keep them down 
If you listen carefully now you will hear. 
 
There's a natural mystic blowing through the air. 
 
This could be the first trumpet, might as well be the last: 
Many more will have to suffer, 
Many more will have to die don't ask me why. 
 
There's a natural mystic blowing through the air 
I won't tell no lie; 
If you listen carefully now you will hear: 
There's a natural mystic blowing through the air. 
Such a natural mystic blowing through the air; 
There's a natural mystic blowing through the air; 
Such a natural mystic blowing through the air; 
Such a natural mystic blowing through the air; 
Such a natural mystic blowing through the air. 
 


 


NIGHT SHIFT

 The sun shall not smite I by day, 
Nor the moon by night; 
And everything that I do 
Shall be upfull and right. 
And if it's all night, 
It got to be all right! 
If it's all night, 
Got to be all right! 
 
Your mamma won't lose this one; 
You're the lucky one under the sun. 
If you make me move, 
Then you know you got the groove: 
All night, it's all right! 
All night, yeah! It's all right! 
 
Working on a forklift 
In the night shift; 
Working on a night shift, 
With the forklift, 
from A.M. (Did you say that? Why did you say that?) 
to P.M. (Working all night!) 
Working on a night shift, yeah! 
(Did you say that? Why did you say that? Upfull and right!) 
Well, if it's (all night!) if it's (all right!) 
all night (all night!) 
 
Warehouse (all right!), 
You're empty, yeah! 
Go around the corner, 
Bring your goods! 
Go around the other corner, 
Bring your suitcases. (All night!) 
By the sweat of my brow, (All right!) 
Eat your bread! (All night!) 
By the sweat of my brow, (All right!) 
Eat your bread! 
 
All night (all night)! All right (all right)! 
All night (all night)! All right (all right)! 
Oh, yeah! (moon by night) 
Why did you say that? Oh, yeah! (Upfull and right!) 
Working on a night shift 
With the forklift. (Moon by night!) 
Working on the night shift, 
Oh, yeah! (Upfull and right!) 
 



NO MORE TROUBLE

 (We don't need) No, we don't need (no more trouble) no more trouble! 
(We don't need no more trouble) 
 
Wo! Oh oh oh! 
(We don't need) We don't need no (no more) trouble! 
We don't need no trouble! 
 
(We don't need no more trouble) 
Make love and not war! 'Cause we don't need no trouble. 
What we need is love (love) 
To guide and protect us on. (on) 
If you hope good down from above, (love) 
Help the weak if you are strong now. (love) 
 
We don't need no trouble; 
What we need is love. Oh, no! 
We don't need we don't need no more trouble! 
Lord knows, we don't need no trouble! 
 
(We don't need) We don't need trouble (no more trouble) 
no more trouble no more trouble! 
Seek happiness! (...) Oh, ...! 
Come on, you all and speak of love. (...) Oh, yeah! 
 
We don't need no trouble; 
What we need is love, now. (What we need is love!) 
(We don't need) Oh, we don't need no more trouble! 
We don't need, no we don't need no trouble! 
We don't (need) no, brothers and sisters ... (no more trouble!) 
 
We don't need no trouble; we don't need no trouble! 
We don't need no trouble! 
What we need is love! 
 
We don't need we don't need no more we don't need 
no more trouble we don't need no more trouble! 
Trouble we don't need (we don't need), 
(We don't need) Lord, knows! 
we don't need no more war (no more trouble). 
No more trouble we don't need no more more trouble! 
 



 


 


NO WOMAN NO CRY

 No, woman, no cry; 
No, woman, no cry; 
No, woman, no cry; 
No, woman, no cry. 
 
'Cause 'cause 'cause I remember when a we used to sit 
In a government yard in Trenchtown, 
Oba obaserving the 'ypocrites yeah! 
Mingle with the good people we meet, yeah! 
Good friends we have, oh, good friends we have lost 
Along the way, yeah! 
In this great future, you can't forget your past; 
So dry your tears, I seh. Yeah! 
 
No, woman, no cry; 
No, woman, no cry. Eh, yeah! 
A little darlin', don't shed no tears: 
No, woman, no cry. Eh! 
 
Said said said I remember when we used to sit 
In the government yard in Trenchtown, yeah! 
And then Georgie would make the fire lights, 
I seh, logwood burnin' through the nights, yeah! 
Then we would cook cornmeal porridge, say, 
Of which I'll share with you, yeah! 
My feet is my only carriage 
And so I've got to push on through. 
Oh, while I'm gone, 
Everything's gonna be all right! 
Everything's gonna be all right! 
Everything's gonna be all right, yeah! 
Everything's gonna be all right! 
Everything's gonna be all right a! 
Everything's gonna be all right! 
Everything's gonna be all right, yeah! 
Everything's gonna be all right! 
 
So no, woman, no cry; 
No, woman, no cry. 
I seh, O little O little darlin', don't shed no tears; 
No, woman, no cry, eh. 
 
No, woman no, woman no, woman, no cry; 
No, woman, no cry. 
One more time I got to say: 
O little little darlin', please don't shed no tears; 
No, woman, no cry. 
 



ONE DROP

 Oo oo ooh, yea ah. Wo yoy! Wo yoy! Wo yoy! Wo yoy yoy yoy! 
Feel it in the one drop; 
And we'll still find time to rap; 
We're makin' the one stop, 
The generation gap; 
Now feel this drumbeat 
As it beats within, 
Playin' a riddim, 
Resisting against the system, ooh wee! 
 
I know Jah's never let us down; 
Pull your rights from wrong 
(I know Jah would never let us down) 
Oh, no! Oh, no! Oh, no! 
They made their world so hard (so hard): 
Every day we got to keep on fighting (fighting); 
They made their world so hard (so hard): 
Every day the people are dyin' (dying), yeah! 
(It dread, dread) For hunger (dread, dread) and starvation 
(dread, dread, dread, dread), 
Lamentation (dread dread), 
But read it in Revelation (dread, dread, dread, dread): 
You'll find your redemption 
And then you give us the teachings of His Majesty, 
For we no want no devil philosophy; 
A you fe give us the teachings of His Majesty, 
A we no want no devil philosophy: 
 
Feel it in the one drop; 
And we still find time to rap; 
We're making the one stop, 
And we filling the gap: 
So feel this drumbeat 
As it beats within 
Playing a riddim, uh! 
Fighting against ism and skism, 
 
Singing: I know Jah's never let us down; 
Pull your rights from wrong: 
I know Jah's never let us down. 
Oh, no! Oh, no! Oh, no! 
They made their world so hard 
Every day (we got to keep on fighting), every day; 
They made their world so hard 
Every day (the people are dying), eh! 
(dread, dread, it dread, dread) Oh, whoa! Make dem a go on so: 
(dread, dread, it dread on dread) Ah, whoa! 
(dread, dread) I'll walk (it dread, dread) 
Ah, whoa! Frighten dem, ah whoa! 
(dread, dread) Ah, whoa! Frighten dem, eh! 
Give us the teachings of His Majesty with a stick up! 
We no want no devil philosophy. Can you hear? 
Give us the teachings of His Majesty, 
For we no want no devil philosophy. 
 
We feel it in the one drop; you're lucky! 
For we still got time to rap, 
And we're making the one stop 
Let me tell ya: this generation gap. 
So feel this drumbeat; 
I tell you what: it's beating within 
Feel you heart playing a riddim 
 


 


ONE LOVE

 One Love! One Heart! 
Let's get together and feel all right. 
Hear the children cryin' (One Love!); 
Hear the children cryin' (One Heart!), 
Sayin': give thanks and praise to the Lord and I will feel all right; 
Sayin': let's get together and feel all right. Wo wo wo wo wo! 
 
Let them all pass all their dirty remarks (One Love!); 
There is one question I'd really love to ask (One Heart!): 
Is there a place for the hopeless sinner, 
Who has hurt all mankind just to save his own beliefs? 
 
One Love! What about the one heart? One Heart! 
What about ? Let's get together and feel all right 
As it was in the beginning (One Love!); 
So shall it be in the end (One Heart!), 
All right! 
Give thanks and praise to the Lord and I will feel all right; 
Let's get together and feel all right. 
One more thing! 
 
Let's get together to fight this Holy Armagiddyon (One Love!), 
So when the Man comes there will be no, no doom (One Song!). 
Have pity on those whose chances grows t'inner; 
There ain't no hiding place from the Father of Creation. 
 
Sayin': One Love! What about the One Heart? (One Heart!) 
What about the ? Let's get together and feel all right. 
I'm pleadin' to mankind! (One Love!); 
Oh, Lord! (One Heart) Wo ooh! 
 
Give thanks and praise to the Lord and I will feel all right; 
Let's get together and feel all right. 
Give thanks and praise to the Lord and I will feel all right; 
Let's get together and feel all right. 



PASS IT ON

 What your hands do, 
It's your own eyes that've seen. 
So won't you judge your actions 
To make sure the results are clean? 
 
It's your own conscience 
That is gonna remind you 
That it's your heart and nobody else's 
That is gonna judge. 
 
Be not selfish in your doings: 
Pass it on. (Pass it on, children) 
Help your brothers (help them) in their needs: 
Pass it on. 
 
Live for yourself and you will live in vain; 
Live for others, you will live again. 
 
In the kingdom of Jah, 
Man shall reign. 
Pass it on; 
Pass it on; 
Pass it on; 
Pass it on. 
 
What's in the darkness 
Must be revealed to light. 
We're not here to judge what's good from bad 
But to do the things that are right. 
 
On a hot, sunny day, 
Follow the shadows for rescue. 
But as the day grows old, 
I know the sun is gonna find you. 
 
Be not selfish in your doings: 
Pass it on. 
Help your brothers in their needs: 
Pass it on. 
 
Live for yourself, you will live in vain; 
Live for others, you will live again. 
 
In the kingdom of Jah, 
Man shall reign. 
Pass it on; 
Pass it on; 
Pass it on; 
Pass it on. (Pass it on) 
 


PIMPER'S PARADISE

 She love to party, have a good time; 
She looks so hearty, feeling fine; 
She loves to smoke, sometime shiftin' coke; 
She'll be laughin' when there ain't no joke. 
 
A pimper's paradise: that's all she was now; 
A pimper's paradise: that's all she was; 
A pimper's paradise: that's all she was now; 
Pimper's paradise: that's all she was. 
(Every need got an ego to feed; 
Every need got an ego to feed.) 
 
She loves to model up in the latest fashion (oo bee doo be doo); 
She's in the scramble and she moves with passion (oo bee doo be doo), 
She's getting high, trying to fly the sky (oo bee doo be doo)! 
Eh! Now she is bluesing when there ain't no blues. 
 
Wo o o oh! A pimper's paradise: that's all she was now; 
A pimper's paradise: that's all she was, oh ho ho ho ho! 
A pimper's paradise: that's all she was now; 
A pimper's paradise: that's all she was. 
 
(Every need got an ego to feed; 
Every need got an ego to feed.) 
 
Wo ho o oh! A pimper's paradise: that's all she was now, wo oo o oo! Wo oh! 
A pimper's paradise: that's all she was. We e e ell a! 
A pimper's paradise: I'm sorry for the victim now; 
Oh, now soon their (pimper's paradise) soon their heads soon their 
Soon their very heads will bow. 
(Pimper's paradise) Don't lose track don't lose track of yourself, oh no! 
(Pimper's paradise) Don't be just a stock a stock on the shelf 
stock on the shelf, oh oh! 
(Pimper's paradise) that's all she was now. Wo oo o oo o oo ... 
 


 


 


POSITIVE VIBRATION

 Live if you want to live 
(Rastaman vibration, yeah! Positive!) 
That's what we got to give! 
(I'n'I vibration yeah! Positive) 
Got to have a good vibe! 
(Iyaman Iration, yeah! Irie ites!) 
Wo wo ooh! 
(Positive vibration, yeah! Positive!) 
 
If you get down and you quarrel everyday, 
You're saying prayers to the devils, I say. Wo oh ooh! 
Why not help one another on the way? 
Make it much easier. (Just a little bit easier) 
 
Say you just can't live that negative way, 
If you know what I mean; 
Make way for the positive day, 
'Cause it's news (new day) news and days 
New time (new time), and if it's a new feelin' (new feelin');, yeah! 
Said it's a new sign (new sign): 
Oh, what a new day! 
 
Pickin' up? 
Are you pickin' up now? 
Jah love Jah love (protect us); 
Jah love Jah love (protect us); 
Jah love Jah love (protect us). 
 
Rastaman vibration, yeah! (Positive!) 
I'n'I vibration, yeah! (Positive!) Uh huh huh, a yeah! 
Iyaman Iration, yeah! (Irie ites!) Wo oo oh! 
*Positive vibration, yeah! (Positive!) 
 
Pickin' up? 
Are you pickin' up now? 
Pickin' up? 
Are you pickin' up now? 
Pickin' up? (Jah love, Jah love ) 
Are you pickin' (protect us!) up now? 
Pickin' up? (Jah love, Jah love ) 
Are you pickin' (protect us!) up now? 
Pickin' up? (Jah love, Jah love ) 
Are you pickin' (protect us!) up now? 
Pickin' up? 
Are you pickin' up now? 
 

PUT IT ON

 Feel them spirit 
Feel them spirit 
Feel them spirit 
Lord, I thank you 
Lord, I thank you 
 
Feel alright now 
Feel alright now 
Feel alright now 
Lord, I thank you 
Lord, I thank you 
 
I'm gonna put it on, I put it on already 
I'm gonna put it on, and it was steady 
I'm gonna put it on, put it on again 
Good Lord, help me 
Good Lord, help me 
 
I'm not boastin' 
I'm not boastin' 
I'm not boastin' 
Feel like toastin' 
Feel like toastin' 
 
I rule my destiny, yeah 
I rule my destiny 
I rule my destiny 
Lord, I thank you, yeah 
Lord, I thank you 
 
No more cryin' 
No more cryin' 
No more cryin' 
Good Lord, hear me 
Good Lord ... 
 


 


PUT IT ON

 Feel them spirit 
Feel them spirit 
Feel them spirit 
Lord, I thank you 
Lord, I thank you 
 
Feel alright now 
Feel alright now 
Feel alright now 
Lord, I thank you 
Lord, I thank you 
 
I'm gonna put it on, I put it on already 
I'm gonna put it on, and it was steady 
I'm gonna put it on, put it on again 
Good Lord, help me 
Good Lord, help me 
 
I'm not boastin' 
I'm not boastin' 
I'm not boastin' 
Feel like toastin' 
Feel like toastin' 
 
I rule my destiny, yeah 
I rule my destiny 
I rule my destiny 
Lord, I thank you, yeah 
Lord, I thank you 
 
No more cryin' 
No more cryin' 
No more cryin' 
Good Lord, hear me 
Good Lord ... 
 


 


RASTA MAN CHANT

 Hear the words of the Rastaman say: 
 Babylon, you throne gone down, gone down; 
Babylon, you throne gone down. 
 
Said I hear the words of the Iyaman say: 
 Babylon, you throne gone down, gone down; 
Babylon, you throne gone down. 
 
 Short instrumental break 
 
And I hear the angel with the seven seals say: 
 Babylon throne gone down, gone down; 
Babylon throne gone down. 
 
 Short instrumental break 
 
I say fly away home to Zion (fly away home); 
I say fly away home to Zion (fly away home). 
One bright morning when my work is over, 
Man will fly away home. 
 
 Short instrumental break 
 
One bright morning when my work is over, 
Man will fly away home. 
One bright morning when my work is over, 
Man will fly away home. 
Say one bright morning when my work is over, 
Man will fly away home. 
 


 

RASTAMAN LIVE UP!

 Rastaman, live up! 
Bongoman, don't give up! 
Congoman, live up, yeah! 
Binghi man don't give up! 
Keep your culture: 
Don't be afraid of the vulture! 
Grow your dreadlock: 
Don't be afraid of the wolf pack! 
 
Rastaman, live up! 
Binghi man, don't give up! 
Congoman, live up, yeah! 
Bongoman, don't give up! 
 
David slew Goliath with a sling and a stone; 
Samson slew the Philistines with a donkey jawbone: 
Iyaman, live up! 
Rastaman, don't give up! 
Binghi man, live up! 
Congoman, don't give up! 
 
Trodding through creation in a irie meditation; 
Seen many visions in a this yah Armagiddyon: 
Rastaman, live up! 
Congoman, don't give up! 
Rastaman, live up, yeah! 
Natty Dread, no give up! 
 
Saw it in the beginning, so shall it be in this iwa; 
And they fallen in confusion, well a just a step from Babel Tower 
Rastaman live up! 
Congoman, no give up! 
Rastaman live up, yeah! 
Congoman, no give up! 
Grow your dreadlocks; 
Don't be afraid of the wolf pack! 
A tell you, one man a walkin'; 
And a billion man a sparkin'. 
 
Rastaman, live up! 
Binghi man, don't give up! 
Don't give up, don't give up, don't give up! 
 

 


RAT RACE

 Uh! Ya too rude! 
Uh! Eh! What a rat race! 
Oh, what a rat race! 
Oh, what a rat race! 
Oh, what a rat race! 
This is the rat race! Rat race! (Rat race!) 
 
Some a lawful, some a bastard, some a jacket: 
Oh, what a rat race, yeah! Rat race! 
 
Some a gorgon a, some a hooligan a, some a guine gog a 
In this 'ere rat race, yeah! 
Rat race! 
I'm singin' that 
When the cat's away, 
The mice will play. 
Political voilence fill ya city, ye ah! 
Don't involve Rasta in your say say; 
Rasta don't work for no C.I.A. 
Rat race, rat race, rat race! Rat race, I'm sayin': 
When you think is peace and safety: 
A sudden destruction. 
Collective security for surety, ye ah! 
 
Don't forget your history; 
Know your destiny: 
In the abundance of water, 
The fool is thirsty. 
Rat race, rat race, rat race! 
 
Rat race! 
Oh, it's a disgrace 
To see the human race 
In a rat race, rat race! 
You got the horse race; 
You got the dog race; 
You got the human race; 
But this is a rat race, rat race! 
 


 


REAL SITUATION

 Check out the real situation: 
Nation war against nation. 
Where did it all begin? 
When will it end? 
Well, it seems like: total destruction the only solution, 
And there ain't no use: no one can stop them now. 
Ain't no use: nobody can stop them now. 
 
Give them an inch, they take a yard; 
Give them a yard, they take a mile (ooh); 
Once a man and twice a child 
And everything is just for a while. 
It seems like: total destruction the only solution, 
And there ain't no use: no one can stop them now. 
There ain't no use: no one can stop them now; 
Ain't no use: no one can stop them now; 
There ain't no use: no one can stop them now. 
 
Check in the real situation (check it out, check it out): 
Nation fight against nation 
Where did it all begin? Wo oo o o oh! 
Where will it end? 
Well, it seems like: total destruction the only solution. 
Mmm, no use: can't stop them; 
W'ain't no use: ya can't stop them; 
Ain't no use: no one can't stop them now; 
Can't stop them now (no one can't stop them now). 
 
There ain't no use: no one can't stop them now. 
Everybody strugglin': ain't no use ain't no use 
Ain't no use you even try; 
Ain't no use: got to say 'bye 'bye! 
Ain't no use! Ain't no ain't no use: no one can stop them now 
(No one can stop them now) 
 


REBEL MUSIC

 (Do do do do do do do! 
Do do do do do do do! 
I rebel music; 
I rebel music.) 
Why can't we roam (oh oh oh oh) this open country? (open country) 
Oh, why can't we be what we wanna be? (oh oh oh oh oh) 
We want to be free. (wanna be free) 
 
3 o'clock roadblock curfew, 
And I've got to throw away 
Yes, I've got to throw away 
A yes a, but I've got to throw away 
My little herb stalk! 
 
I (rebel music) yeah, I'm tellin' you! 
(I) I rebel music (rebel music). Oh ooh! 
 
Take my soul (oh oh oh oh oh) 
and suss and suss me out (suss me out). Oh ooh! 
Check my life (oh oh oh oh oh), 
if I am in doubt (I'm in doubt); I'm tellin': 
3 o'clock roadblock roadblock roadblock, 
And Hey, Mr. Cop! Ain't got no (hey) hey! (hey, Mr Cop) 
(What ya sayin' down there?) (hey) hey! (hey, Mr Cop) 
Ain't got no birth certificate on me now. 
 
 Instrumental break 
 
(I rebel music) 
(I rebel music) 
(oh oh oh oh oh) 
(open country) 
(oh oh oh) 
 
(Do do do!) 
I (rebel music) yeah, I'm tellin' you! 
(I) I rebel music (rebel music). 
 
Oh ooh! Take my soul (oh oh oh oh oh) 
and suss and suss me out (suss me out). Oh ooh! 
Check my life (oh oh oh oh oh), 
if I am in doubt (I'm in doubt); I'm tellin': 
3 o'clock roadblock roadblock roadblock, 
And Hey, Mr. Cop! Ain't got no (hey) hey! (hey, Mr Cop) 
(What ya sayin' down there?) (hey) hey! (hey, Mr Cop) 
Ain't got no birth certificate on me now. 
 


 


REDEMPTION SONG

 Old pirates, yes, they rob I; 
Sold I to the merchant ships, 
Minutes after they took I 
From the bottomless pit. 
But my hand was made strong 
By the 'and of the Almighty. 
We forward in this generation 
Triumphantly. 
Won't you help to sing 
These songs of freedom? 
'Cause all I ever have: 
Redemption songs; 
Redemption songs. 
 
Emancipate yourselves from mental slavery; 
None but ourselves can free our minds. 
Have no fear for atomic energy, 
'Cause none of them can stop the time. 
How long shall they kill our prophets, 
While we stand aside and look? Ooh! 
Some say it's just a part of it: 
We've got to fulfil de book. 
 
Won't you help to sing 
These songs of freedom? 
'Cause all I ever have: 
Redemption songs; 
Redemption songs; 
Redemption songs. 
 
/Guitar break/ 
 
Emancipate yourselves from mental slavery; 
None but ourselves can free our mind. 
Wo! Have no fear for atomic energy, 
'Cause none of them a can a stop a the time. 
How long shall they kill our prophets, 
While we stand aside and look? 
Yes, some say it's just a part of it: 
We've got to fulfil de book. 
Won't you help to sing 
Dese songs of freedom? 
'Cause all I ever had: 
Redemption songs 
All I ever had: 
Redemption songs: 
These songs of freedom, 
Songs of freedom. 
 


REDEMPTION SONG

Old pirates, yes, they rob I;  Sold I to the merchant ships,  Minutes after they took I  From the bottomless pit.  But my hand was made strong  By the 'and of the Almighty.  We forward in this generation  Triumphantly.  Won't you help to sing  These songs of freedom?    'Cause all I ever have:  Redemption songs;  Redemption songs.    Emancipate yourselves from mental slavery;  None but ourselves can free our minds.  Have no fear for atomic energy,  'Cause none of them can stop the time.  How long shall they kill our prophets,  While we stand aside and look? Ooh!  Some say it's just a part of it:  We've got to fulfil de book.    Won't you help to sing  These songs of freedom?    'Cause all I ever have:  Redemption songs;  Redemption songs;  Redemption songs.       /Guitar break/       Emancipate yourselves from mental slavery;  None but ourselves can free our mind.  Wo! Have no fear for atomic energy,  'Cause none of them a can a stop a the time.  How long shall they kill our prophets,  While we stand aside and look?  Yes, some say it's just a part of it:  We've got to fulfil de book.  Won't you help to sing  Dese songs of freedom?    'Cause all I ever had:  Redemption songs    All I ever had:  Redemption songs:  These songs of freedom,  Songs of freedom.       


REVOLUTION

 Revelation reveals the truth revelation. 
(revolution, revolution, revolution oooo doo doo doo doo) 
(revolution oooo doo doo doo doo) 
 
It takes a revolution (revolution) to make a solution; 
(doo doo doo doo) 
Too much confusion (aaa aaah), so much frustration, eh! 
I don't wanna live in the park (live in the park); 
Can't trust no shadows after dark (shadows after dark), yeah eh! 
So, my friend, I wish that you could see, 
Like a bird in the tree, the prisoners must be free, yeah! (free) 
 
Never make a politician (aaa aaah) grant you a favour; 
(doo doo doo doo) 
They will always want (aaa aaah) to control you forever, eh! 
(forever, forever) 
So if a fire make it burn (make it burn, make it burn) 
And if a blood make ya run (make ya run, run, run), 
Rasta de 'pon top (aaa aaah), can't you see? (doo doo doo doo) 
So you can't predict the flop. Eh eh! (doo doo doo doo) 
 
We got lightning (lightning), thunder (thunder), 
brimstone (brimstone) and fire fire (fire, fire); 
Lightning (lightning), thunder (thunder), 
brr brimstone (brimstone) and fire fiyah fire fiyah! 
(fire, fire) 
 
Kill, cramp and paralyze all weak at conception; 
(aaa aaah, doo doo doo doo) 
Wipe them out of creation (creation), yeah eah! (creation) 
Wa Jah, Jah, Jah! Wa Jah, Jah, Jah! (creation) 
Wa Jah, Jah, Jah! (creation) 
 
Oh! Let i'es is i'es (i'es), in i'es is black (i'es), 
In i'es is red (i'es), in i'es is dread. 
 
Let righteousness cover the earth 
Like the water (aaa aaah) cover the sea, yeah! Yeah! 
 
Lightning (lightning), doo doo doo (thunder), 
doo doo doo (brimstone), doo doo doo (fire, fire); 
A lightning (lightning), thunder (thunder), 
brimstone (brimstone) and fire. 
 

     


RIDE NATTY RIDE

 Rub, rub, rubby doo day; 
Rum pum pum a rum pum pum pum! 
Dready got a job to do 
And he's got to fulfill that mission 
To see his hurt is their greatest ambition, yeah! 
But a we will survive in this world of competition, 
'Cause no matter what they do 
Natty keep on comin'through, 
And no matter what they say ay ay ay, 
Natty de deh every day. yeah! 
Natty Dread rides again, 
Through the mystics of tomorrow, 
Natty Dread rides again: 
Have no fear, have no sorrow, yeah! 
 
All and all you see a gwan 
Is to fight against Rastaman. 
So they build their world in great confusion 
To force on us the devil's illusion. 
But the stone that the builder refuse 
Shall be the head cornerstone, 
And no matter what game they play, 
Eh, we got something they could never take away; 
We got something they could never take away: 
 
And it's the fire (fire), it's the fire (fire) 
That's burning down everything: 
Feel that fire (fire), the fire (fire); 
Only the birds have their wings, yeah! 
No time to be deceived. 
Oh, brothers, you should know and not believe: 
Jah say this judgement it could never be with water, 
No water could put out this fire (fire): 
This fire (fire), this fire (fire), 
This fire (fire), a yaga y'all! Ride, Natty, ride! 
Go deh, Dready, go deh, 
'Cause now the fire is out of control, 
Panic in the city, wicked weeping for their gold! 
Everywhere this fiyah is burning, 
Destroying and melting their gold, 
Destroying and waisting their souls. 
 
Go ride, Natty, ride! 
Go deh, Dready! Go deh! 
 
Tell you what: now the people gather on the beach 
And the leader try to make a speech, 
But the Dreadies understandin' that it's too late: 
Fire is burning; 
Man, pull your own weight! 
Fiyah is burning; 
Man, pull your own weight! 
Natty Dread rides again (Natty Dread rides again); 
And me say, Go deh, Dready! Go deh! (go deh, go deh) 
Oh ride, Natty, ride! (Dread rides again) 
And go deh, Dready! (Go deh, go deh) 
Ridin' through the storm, 
Riding through the calm (go deh, go deh). 
Oh ride, Natty, ride! 
Go deh, Dready, go deh! 
Ride, Natty, ride! 
Go deh, Dready, do deh! 
 


 


RIDING HIGH

 You've been riding 
You've been riding quite a while, child 
(keep on riding, keep on riding) 
You've been jiving 
Like a peacock, that's your style 
(keep on jiving), ooh (keep on jiving) 
 
Now I remember the days in school 
There wasn't a time when you didn't treat me cruel 
Ooh, wait till I get my hooks on you 
I'll show you what a fisherman can do 
 
You're riding 
Been riding quite a while, child 
(keep on riding, keep on riding) 
You've been jiving 
Like a peacock, that's your style 
(keep on jiving), ooh wee (keep on jiving) 
 
I say now, you always try to hurt me in the end 
In the presence of all our good, good friends 
But the patient man always win 
Now I'll just wait till you give in 
 
You've been riding 
You've been riding quite a while 
(keep on riding), keep on, ride (keep on riding) 
You've been jiving 
Like a peacock, that's your style 
(keep on jiving ...), ooh wee, alright (... on jiving) 
 
At Christmas, more like an Easter bunny 
Just like a rabbit, you're always on the run 
But wait till I get my trap on you 
I'll see where you gonna run to 
Wait till I get my trap on you 
Then I'll see where you gonna run to 
 
You've been riding 
You've been riding quite a while 
(keep on riding), keep on, ride (keep on riding) 
You've been jiving 
Like a peacock, that's your style 
(keep on jiving), ooh wee (keep on jiving) 
 
(So riding on my own) I need your love tonight 
(Riding on my own) A when you hold me right ... 
 


ROCK IT BABY

 Baby, baby, we've got a date; (ooh hoo, ooh hoo) 
Oh, baby, baby, don't you be late. Oh, baby! 
 
I'll meet you at your house at a quarter to eight. (ooh hoo, ooh hoo) 
Oh, darlin', baby, baby, just you have some faith! 
I promise you, we're gonna (rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight); 
To (rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight); 
Gonna (rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight); 
Baby, (rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight). 
 
Wo oh, na na na, na na na, na na! 
 
Oh, we walk through the pale moonlight 
With our love that is right. 
Oh, my, my, my, ye ah! 
 
Oh, so happy we will be 
Sharing the love tha y is free! 
 
(Got to get together, babe, tonight!) 
Oh, darlin', say we got to get together, baby, (tonight); 
Say we got to get together, babe, (tonight). Get together, babe! 
Got to get together, babe, (tonight)! 
 
Baby, we've got a date, don't you remember? 
Baby, baby, don't you be late. Please don't forget: 
I'll meet you at your house at a quarter to eight. Oh, baby! 
Baby, baby, just you have some faith! Wo, now! 
Say we gonna rock it rockin'! 
(Rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight.) 
Say we (rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight). 
We gonna (rock it, baby), wo! (Rock it, baby, tonight.) 
Say we (rock it, baby) eh! (Rock it, baby, tonight.) 
Say we got to get together, babe, (tonight). 
Baby, baby, wo! (Say we got to get together, babe, tonight!) 
Say we got to get together, babe, (tonight). Are you sure ...? 
(Say we got to get together, babe, tonight). Wo! 
 
 Guitar solo 
 
(Rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight); 
(Rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight); 
Gonna (rock it, baby), baby; (Rock it, baby, tonight!) 
Eh! (Rock it, baby( oh, baby! (Rock it, baby, tonight!) 
Oh! (Got to get together, babe, tonight!) 
Got to get together, babe, (tonight). 
Say we (got to get together, babe, tonight). 
(Got to get together, babe) Eh! Oh oh, baby! (tonight) 
 
Oh, baby, baby, we've got that date 
(Rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight) 
(Rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight) 
Baby, baby, don't you be late! 
(Rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight; 
rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight!) Oh, now! 
I'll meet you at your house at a quarter to eight. 
(Rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight; 
rock it, baby; rock it, baby, tonight!) 
Oh, darlin'! 
 




ROOTS, ROCK, REGGAE

 Play I some music: (dis a) reggae music! 
Play I some music: (dis a) reggae music! 
Roots, rock, reggae: dis a reggae music! 
Roots, rock, reggae: dis a reggae music! 
 
Hey, Mister Music, sure sounds good to me! 
I can't refuse it: what to be got to be. 
Feel like dancing, dance 'cause we are free; 
Feel like dancing, come dance with me! 
 
Roots, rock, reggae: dis a reggae music! 
Roots, rock, reggae, yeah! Dis a reggae music! 
Play I some music: dis a reggae music! 
Play I some music: dis a reggae music! 
 
Play I on the R&B wo oh! Want all my people to see: 
We're bubblin' on the Top 100, just like a mighty dread! 
Play I on the R&B; want all my people to see: 
We bubblin' on the Top 100, just like a mighty dread! 
 
Roots, rock, reggae: dis a reggae music! Uh uh! 
Roots, rock, reggae, ee mi duba! Dis a reggae music! 
Play I some music: (dis a reggae music!) 
Play I some music: (dis a reggae music!) 
 
/Saxophone solo/ 
(Dis a reggae music!) 
(Dis a reggae music!) 
 
Play I on the R&B; I want all my people to see: (doo doo doo doo!) 
We bubblin' on the Top 100, just like a mighty dread! 
(doo doo doo doo!) 
Play I some music: (dis a) reggae music! 
Play I some music: (dis a) reggae music! 
(Dis a reggae music!) 
(Dis a reggae music!) 
 



RUNNING AWAY

 Ya running and ya running 
And ya running away. 
Ya running and ya running 
And ya running away. 
Ya running and ya running 
And ya running away. 
Ya running and ya running, 
But ya can't run away from yourself 
Can't run away from yourself 
Can't run away from yourself 
Can't run away from yourself 
Can't run away from yourself 
Can't run away from yourself. 
 
Ya must have done (must have done), 
Somet'in' wrong (something wrong). 
Said: ya must have done (must have done), 
Wo! Somet'in' wrong (something wrong). 
Why you can't find the 
Place where you belong? 
Do do do do do do do do do (running away); 
Do do do do do do do do do (running away); 
Do do do do do do do do do (running away); 
Do do do do do do do do do (running away); 
Do do do do do do do do do (running away). 
 
Every man thinketh his 
Burden is the heaviest (heaviest). 
Every man thinketh his 
Burden is the heaviest (heaviest). 
Ya still mean it: Who feels it knows it, Lord; 
Who feels it knows it, Lord; 
Who feels it knows it, Lord; 
Who feels it knows it, Lord. 
 
Ya running and ya running 
And ya running away. 
Ya running and ya running 
And ya running away. 
Ya running and ya running 
And ya running away. 
Ya running and ya running 
But ya can't run away from yourself. 
Could ya run away from yourself? 
Can you run away from yourself? 
Can't run away from yourself! 
Can't run away from yourself! 
Yeah eah eah eah from yourself. 
 
Brr you must have done somet'in' 
Somet'in' somet'in' somet'in' 
Somet'in' ya don't want nobody to know about: 
Ya must have, Lord somet'in' wrong, 
What ya must have done ya must have done somet'in' wrong. 
Why you can't find where you belong? 
 
Well, well, well, well, ya running away, heh, no 
Ya running away, ooh, no, no, no, 
I'm not (running away), no, don't say that don't say that, 
'Cause (running away) I'm not running away, ooh! (running away) 
I've got to protect my life, (running away) 
And I don't want to live with no strife. (running away) 
It is better to live on the housetop (running away) 
Than to live in a house full of confusion. (running away) 
So, I made my decision and I left ya; (running away) 
Now you comin' to tell me (running away) 
That I'm runnin' away. (running away) 
But it's not true, (running away) 
I am not runnin' away. (running away) 
 


 


SATISFY MY SOUL

 Oh, please don't you rock my boat (don't rock my boat) 
'Cause I don't want my boat to be rockin' (don't rock my boat) 
Oh, please don't you rock my boat (don't rock my boat) 
'Cause I don't want my boat to be rockin' (don't rock my boat) 
 
I'm telling you that, oh, oh ooh, wo o wo! 
I like it like it this (I like it like this, I like it like this) 
So keep it steady, like this. (I like it like this) 
And you should know you should know by now: 
I like it (I like it like this), I like it like this 
(I like it like this, I like it like this), 
I like it like this, ooh yeah! (I like it like this) 
 
(Satisfy my soul) You satisfy my soul (satisfy my soul); 
You satisfy my soul (satisfy my soul). 
Every little action (satisfy my soul), 
there's a reaction (satisfy my soul). 
Oh, can't you see what you've done for me, oh, yeah! 
I am happy inside all all of the time. Wo oo o oo! 
 
When we (bend) bend a new corner, 
I feel like a (sweep) sweepstake winner. 
When I meet you around the corner (round the corner), 
You make me feel like a sweepstake winner (a sweep a sweepstake winner). 
Whoa, child! Can't you see? You must believe me! 
Oh darling, darling, I'm calling, calling: 
Can't you see? Why won't you believe me? 
Oh, darling, darling, I'm calling, calling 
(calling, calling, calling, calling) 
 
When I meet you around the corner, 
Oh, I said, Baby, never let me be a loner , 
And then you hold me tight, you make me feel all right. 
Yes, when you hold me tight, you made me feel all right. 
 
Whoa, honey, can't you see? Don't you believe me? 
Oh, darling, darling, I'm callin', callin': 
Can't you see? Why won't you believe me? 
Oh, darling, darling, I'm callin', callin' 
(calling, calling, calling, calling). 
 
Satisfy my soul satisfy my soul satisfy my soul satisfy my soul: 
That's all I want you to do, that's all I'll take from you: 
Satisfy my soul, satisfy my soul. 
 

SHE'S GONE

 My woman is gone (woman is gone), 
my woman is gone (woman is gone). 
 
She had left me a note hanging on my door: 
She say she couldn't take it, she couldn't take any more. 
The pressure around me just couldn't see; 
She felt like a prisoner who needs to be free. 
Fools have tried, yeah wisemen have failed: 
Oh, listen to me, honey: life could never be another jail. 
Still we know now: we'll never see smoke without fire 
And everyone you see has a heart desire. 
 
She's gone (she's gone), she's gone (she's gone), 
she's gone (she's gone), she's gone, ye ah! 
Oh, mocking bird, have you ever heard, 
Words that I never heard? 
Oh, mocking bird, have you ever heard, 
Words that I never heard? 
 
She made it through the exit (she just couldn't take it); 
She made it through the exit (she just couldn't make it). 
And, oh, my children, if you see me cryin': 
My woman is gone. 
If you see me if you see me if you see me 
if you see me cryin' 
If you see me if you see me if you see me 
if you see me cryin': 
 
She's gone (she's gone), she's gone (she's gone), she's gone, ye ah! 
Oh, mocking bird, have you ever heard, 
Words that I never heard? 
Oh, mocking bird, have you ever heard, 
Words that I never heard? 
She's gone (she's gone), she's gone (she's gone), she's gone 
(she's gone) 
 


 


SLAVE DRIVER

 Ooh ooh oo ooh. Oo oo ooh! Oo oo ooh. 
Slave driver, the table is turn; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire, so you can get burn, now. (catch a fire) 
Slave driver, the table is turn; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire: gonna get burn. (catch a fire) Wo, now! 
 
Ev'rytime I hear the crack of a whip, 
My blood runs cold. 
I remember on the slave ship, 
How they brutalize the very souls. 
Today they say that we are free, 
Only to be chained in poverty. 
Good God, I think it's illiteracy; 
It's only a machine that makes money. 
Slave driver, the table is turn, y'all. Ooh ooh oo ooh. 
 
Slave driver, uh! The table is turn, baby, now; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire, so you can get burn, baby, now. (catch a fire) 
Slave driver, the table is turn, y'all; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire: so you can get burn, now. (catch a fire) 
 
Ev'rytime I hear the crack of a whip, 
My blood runs cold. 
I remember on the slave ship, 
How they brutalize the very soul. 
 
O God, have mercy on our souls! 
Oh, slave driver, the table is turn, y'all; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire, so you can get burn. (catch a fire) 
Slave driver, the table is turn, y'all; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire ... 
 


SLAVE DRIVER

 Ooh ooh oo ooh. Oo oo ooh! Oo oo ooh. 
Slave driver, the table is turn; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire, so you can get burn, now. (catch a fire) 
Slave driver, the table is turn; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire: gonna get burn. (catch a fire) Wo, now! 
 
Ev'rytime I hear the crack of a whip, 
My blood runs cold. 
I remember on the slave ship, 
How they brutalize the very souls. 
Today they say that we are free, 
Only to be chained in poverty. 
Good God, I think it's illiteracy; 
It's only a machine that makes money. 
Slave driver, the table is turn, y'all. Ooh ooh oo ooh. 
 
Slave driver, uh! The table is turn, baby, now; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire, so you can get burn, baby, now. (catch a fire) 
Slave driver, the table is turn, y'all; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire: so you can get burn, now. (catch a fire) 
 
Ev'rytime I hear the crack of a whip, 
My blood runs cold. 
I remember on the slave ship, 
How they brutalize the very soul. 
 
O God, have mercy on our souls! 
Oh, slave driver, the table is turn, y'all; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire, so you can get burn. (catch a fire) 
Slave driver, the table is turn, y'all; (catch a fire) 
Catch a fire ... 
      


SMALL AXE

 Why boasteth thyself 
Oh, evil men 
Playing smart 
And not being clever? 
I said, you're working iniquity 
To achieve vanity (if a so a so) 
But the goodness of Jah, Jah 
I dureth for I ver 
 
So if you are the big tree 
We are the small axe 
Ready to cut you down (well sharp) 
To cut you down 
 
These are the words 
Of my master, keep on tellin' me 
No weak heart 
Shall prosper 
And whosoever diggeth a pit 
Shall fall in it, fall in it 
And whosoever diggeth a pit 
Shall fall in it (... fall in it) 
 
If you are the big tree, let me tell you that 
We are the small axe, sharp and ready 
Ready to cut you down (well sharp) 
To cut you down 
 
(To cut you down) 
 
(To cut you down) 
 
These are the words 
Of my master, tellin' me that 
No weak heart 
Shall prosper 
And whosoever diggeth a pit 
Shall fall in it, uh, bury in it 
And whosoever diggeth a pit 
Shall bury in it, uh (... bury in it) 
 
If you are the big, big tree 
We are the small axe 
Ready to cut you down (well sharp) 
To cut you down 
If you are the big, big tree, let me tell you that 
We are the small axe 
Ready to cut you down (well sharp) 
To cut you down 
Sharpened ... 
 


 


SO JAH SEH

 So Jah seh, 
 Not one of my seeds 
Shall sit in the sidewalk 
And beg bread. 
(No, they can't and you know that they won't!) 
 
So Jah seh, 
 Not one of my seeds 
Shall sit in the sidewalk 
And beg your bread. 
(No, they can't and you know that they won't!) 
 And verily, verily, I'm saying unto thee, 'I 
Inite oneself and love Imanity.' 
'Cause puss and dog they get together: 
What's wrong with loving one another? 
Puss and dog they get together: 
What's wrong with you my brother? 
 
So Jah seh, 
 Ye are the sheep of my pasture; 
So verily, thou shall be very well. 
So Jah seh yeah! 
 Ye are the sheep of my pasture; 
So verily, thou shall be very well, yeah! 
 
And down here in the ghetto, 
And down here we suffer. 
But I'n'I a hang on in there 
And I'n'I, I naw leggo; 
I'n'I a hang on in there 
and I'n'I, I naw leggo. 
 
For so Jah seh yeah! 
 I'm gone to prepare a place, 
That where I am thou shall abide, yeah! 
So Jah seh, 
 Fear not for mighty dread, 
'Cause I'll be there at your side. 
 
And and down there down there in the ghetto 
And down there we suffer 
But I'n'I a hang on in there 
And I'n'I, I naw leggo. 
But I'n'I a hang on in there 
And I'n'I, I naw leggo; 
 So Jah seh. 
 

SO MUCH THINGS TO SAY

 Ooh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah! 
Ooh yeah, yeah! 
They got so much things to say right now; 
They got so much things to say. 
They got so much things to say right now; 
They got so much things to say. 
 
Eh! But I'll never forget no way: they crucified Je sus Christ; 
I'll never forget no way: they stole Marcus Garvey for rights. 
Oo ooh! 
I'll never forget no way: they turned their back on Paul Bogle. 
Hey ey! 
So don't you forget (no way) your youth, 
who you are and where you stand in the struggle. 
 
They go so very, so very, so very, so very, so very, so very, 
so very, so very, so very, so very, so very 
everything they say so much to say. 
They got so much things to say, so much things to say. 
 
 
I'n'I nah come to fight flesh and blood, 
But spiritual wickedness in 'igh and low places. 
So while they fight you down, 
Stand firm and give Jah thanks and praises. 
'Cos I'n'I no expect to be justified 
by the laws of men by the laws of men. 
Oh, true they have found me guilty, 
But through through Jah proved my innocency. 
 
Oh, when the rain fall, fall, fall now, 
It don't fall on one man's housetop. Remember that: 
When the rain fall, 
It don't fall on one man's housetop. 
 
They singin': so very much, so very much, oh so very much, 
so very, very 
They got so much things to say right now; 
yeah, they got so much things to say. 
 
Hey, but I'n'I I'n'I nah come to fight flesh and blood, 
But spiritual wickedness in 'igh and low places. 
So while, so while, so while they fight you down, 
Stand firm and give Jah thanks and praises. 
I'n'I no expect to be justified 
by the laws of men by the laws of men. 
Oh, hey through Jah to prove my innocency, 
I told you wicked think they found me guilty. 
 
They got la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la; 
la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la; 
la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la; 
la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la 
 they la very much all the time. 
 
So much things to say, rumour about, 
they got so much without humour, 
they don't know what they're doin', yeah. 
 


 


SO MUCH TROUBLE IN THE WORLD

 So much trouble in the world; 
So much trouble in the world. 
 
Bless my eyes this morning; 
Jah sun is on the rise once again. 
The way earthly thin's are goin', 
Anything can happen. 
 
You see men sailing on their ego trip, 
Blast off on their spaceship, 
Million miles from reality: 
No care for you, no care for me. 
 
So much trouble in the world; 
So much trouble in the world. 
All you got to do: give a little (give a little), 
Give a little (give a little), give a little (give a little)! 
One more time, ye ah! (give a little) Ye ah! (give a little) 
Ye ah! (give a little) Yeah! 
 
So you think you've found the solution, 
But it's just another illusion! 
(So before you check out this tide), 
Don't leave another cornerstone 
Standing there behind, eh eh eh eh! 
We've got to face the day; 
(Ooh) Ooh wee, come what may: 
We the street people talkin', 
Yeah, we the people strugglin'. 
 
 Instrumental break 
 
Now they sitting on a time bomb; 
(Bomb bomb bomb! Bomb bomb bomb!) 
Now I know the time has come: 
(Bomb bomb bomb! Bomb bomb bomb!) 
What goes on up is coming on down, 
(Bomb bomb bomb! Bomb bomb bomb!) 
Goes around and comes around. 
(Bomb bomb bomb! Bomb bomb bomb!) 
 
So much trouble in the world; 
So much trouble in the world; 
So much trouble in the world. 
There is so much trouble 
(so much trouble in the world); 
There is so much trouble; 
There is so much trouble 
(so much in the world); 
There is so much trouble; 
There is so much trouble in the world 
(so much trouble in the world); 
There is (so much in the world); 
(So much trouble in the world) 
 


 


STAND ALONE

 There you are, cryin' again 
But your loveliness won't cover your shame 
There you are, you're takin' true love 
And while you're takin' true love, you given the blame 
 
(How could I ...) Could I be so wrong 
To think that we could get along? 
Days I wasted with you, child 
If I count there'll be a million or two 
Now I stand alone through the memories 
That haunts me, that haunt 
Yeah, and I walk alone through the rhapsodies 
That taunts me, that taunts me, me 
 
There you are, cryin' again 
But your loveline ness won't cover your shame 
There you are, you're takin' true love 
And while you're takin' true love, given the blame 
 
(How could I ...) How could I be so wrong 
To think that we could get along? 
Days I wasted with you, child 
If I count there'll be a million or two 
Now I stand alone through the memories 
That haunts me, that haunts (... me) 
And I walk alone through the rhapsodies 
That taunts me, that taunts me 
 
Now, there you are, cryin' again 
But your loveline ness won't cover your sham ame, hey 
There you are, you're takin' true lo love 
While you're takin' true lo love, given the blame 
 
(How could I ...) How could I ... 
 


 
STIFF NECKED FOOLS

 Stiff necked fools, you think you are cool 
To deny me for simplicity. 
Yes, you have gone for so long 
With your love for vanity now. 
Yes, you have got the wrong interpretation 
Mixed up with vain imagination. 
 
So take Jah Sun, and Jah Moon, 
And Jah Rain, and Jah Stars, 
And forever, yes, erase your fantasy, yea eah! 
 
The lips of the righteous teach many, 
But fools die for want of wisdom. 
The rich man's wealth is in his city; 
The righteous' wealth is in his Holy Place. 
 
So take Jah Sun, and Jah Moon, 
And Jah Rain, and Jah Stars, 
And forever, yes, erase your fantasy, yeah! 
Destruction of the poor is in their poverty; 
Destruction of the soul is vanity, yeah! 
 
So stiff necked fools, you think you are cool 
To deny me for simplicity, yea ea eah! 
Yes, you have gone gone for so long 
With your love for vanity now. 
 
But I don't wanna rule ya! 
I don't wanna fool ya! 
I don't wanna school ya: 
Things you you might never know about! 
 
Yes, you have got the wrong interpretation 
Mixed up with vain vain imagination: 
Stiff necked fools, you think you are cool 
To deny me for, o ooh, simplicity. 
 



 


STIR IT UP

 Stir it up; little darlin', stir it up. Come on, baby. 
Come on and stir it up: little darlin', stir it up. O oh! 
 
It's been a long, long time, yeah! 
(stir it, stir it, stir it together) 
Since I got you on my mind. (ooh ooh ooh ooh) Oh oh! 
Now you are here (stir it, stir it, stir it together), I said, 
it's so clear 
There's so much we could do, baby, (ooh ooh ooh ooh) 
Just me and you. 
 
Come on and stir it up; ..., little darlin'! 
Stir it up; come on, baby! 
Come on and stir it up, yeah! 
Little darlin', stir it up! O oh! 
 
I'll push the wood (stir it, stir it, stir it together), 
then I blaze ya fire; 
Then I'll satisfy your heart's desire. (ooh ooh ooh ooh) 
Said, I stir it every (stir it, stir it, stir it together), 
every minute: 
All you got to do, baby, (ooh ooh ooh ooh) 
Is keep it in, eh! 
 
(Stir it up) Oh, little darlin', 
Stir it up; ..., baby! 
Come on and stir it up, oh oh oh! 
Little darlin', stir it up! Wo oh! Mm, now, now. 
 
Quench me when I'm thirsty; 
Come on and cool me down, baby, when I'm hot. (ooh ooh ooh ooh) 
Your recipe is, darlin' is so tasty, 
When you show and stir your pot. (ooh ooh ooh ooh) 
 
So: stir it up, oh! 
Little darlin', stir it up; wo, now! 
Come on and stir it up, oh ah! 
Little darlin', stir it up! 
 
 Guitar solo 
 
Oh, little darlin', stir it up. Come on, babe! 
Come on and stir it up, wo o a! 
Little darlin', stir it up! Stick with me, baby! 
Come on, come on and stir it up, oh oh! 
Little darlin', stir it up. 
 


STOP THAT TRAIN

 Stop that train: I'm leavin' today! 
Stop that train: I'm leavin' anyway! 
Stop that train: I'm leavin'. And I said: 
It won't be too long whether I'm right or wrong; 
I said, it won't be too long whether I'm right or wrong. 
 
All my good life I've been a lonely man, 
Teachin' my people who don't understand; 
And even though I tried my best, 
I still can't find no happiness. 
 
So I got to say: 
Stop that train: I'm leavin' oh, baby now! 
Stop that train: I'm leavin' don't care what you say! 
Stop that train: I'm leavin'. And I said: 
It won't be too long whether I'm right or wrong; 
Said, it won't be too long whether I'm right or wrong. 
 
Some goin' east; and a some goin' west, 
Some stand aside to try their best. 
Some livin' big, but the most is livin' small:: 
They just can't even find no food at all. 
 
I mean, stop it: 
Stop that train: I'm leavin' leavin', mm hmm. 
Stop that train: I'm leavin' I don't mind! 
Stop that train: I'm leavin'. And I said: 
It won't be too long whether I'm right or wrong; 
I said it won't be too long whether I'm right or wrong. 
 
Stop that train: I'm leavin' leavin'! 
Stop that train: I'm leavin' can't take it! 
Stop that train: I'm leavin' got to be better! 
It won't be too long whether I'm right or wrong; 
I said it won't be too long whether I'm right or wrong. 


 


SUN IS SHINING

 Sun is shining, the weather is sweet, yeah 
Make you wanna move your dancing feet now 
To the rescue, here I am 
Want you to know, y'all, can you understand? 
 
When the mornin' gather the rainbow, yeah, yeah 
Want you to know, I'm a rainbow too now 
To the rescue, here I am 
Want you to know, y'all, can you, can you, can you understand? 
 
Sun is shining, the weather is sweet now 
Make you wanna move your dancing feet, yeah 
But to the rescue, here I am 
Want you to know just if you can, here I stand, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no 
 
Can you understand me now, baby? 
Do you believe me? 
 



SUN IS SHINING

 ...... Wo o wo! 
Sun is shinin', the weather is sweet; 
Make you want to move your dancin' feet: 
To the rescue, here I am! 
Want you to know, y'all, where I stand! 
 
 Instrumental break 
 
(Monday morning) Here I am! 
Want you to know (Tuesday evening) just if you can 
Where I stand. 
(Wednesday morning) Tell myself a new day is risin'; 
(Thursday evening) get on the rise a new day is dawnin'. 
(Friday morning) Here I am! 
(Saturday evening) Want you to know just 
Want you to know just where I stand! 
 
When the morning gathers the rainbow, 
Want you to know, I'm a rainbow, too. 
So, to the rescue, here I am! 
Want you to know just if you can 
Where I (stand) know know know know 
know know know know. 
 
 Guitar solo 
 
We'll lift our heads and give Jah praises a! 
We'll lift our heads and give Jah praises, yea eah! 
 
(Sun is shining, the weather is sweet now 
Make you want to move your dancing feet) 
So, to the rescue, here I am! 
Want you to know just if you can 
Where I (stand) know know know know where I stand 
 
(Monday morning), scoo be doop scoop scoop! 
Tuesday evening, scoo be doop scoop scoop! 
Wednesday morning, scoo be doop scoop scoop! 
Thursday evening, scoo be doop scoop scoop! 
Friday morning, scoo be doop scoop scoop! 
Saturday evening, scoo be doop scoop scoop! 
 
So, to the rescue to the rescue to the rescue, all right! And so ... 
 
 Instrumental break 
 
Awake from your sleep and slumber: 
Today could bring your lucky number, er er! 
Sun is shining (and the weather is sweet) 
Sun is shining (and the weather is sweet) 
Sun is shining (and the weather is sweet) 
Sun is shining (and the weather is sweet) 
 

SURVIVAL

 (Ow, ow ow ow ow! 
Ow, ow ow ow ow!) 
Yeah, yeah, yeah! 
How can you be sitting there 
Telling me that you care 
That you care? 
When every time I look around, 
The people suffer in the suffering 
In everyway, in everywhere. 
 
Say: na na na na na (na na, na na!): 
We're the survivors, yes: the Black survivors! 
I tell you what: some people got everything; 
Some people got nothing; 
Some people got hopes and dreams; 
Some people got ways and means. 
 
Na na na na na (na na, na na!): 
We're the survivors, yes: the Black survivors! 
Yes, we're the survivors, like Daniel out of the lions' den 
(Black survivors) Survivors, survivors! 
So I Idren, I sistren, 
A which way will we choose? 
We better hurry; oh, hurry; oh, hurry; wo, now! 
'Cause we got no time to lose. 
Some people got facts and claims; 
Some people got pride and shame; 
Some people got the plots and schemes; 
Some people got no aim it seems! 
 
Na na na na na, na na, na! 
We're the survivors, yes: the Black survivors! 
Tell you what: we're the survivors, yeah! the Black survivors, yeah! 
We're the survivors, like Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego 
(Black survivors), 
Thrown in the fire, but a never get burn. 
So I Idren, I sistren, 
The preaching and talkin' is done; 
We've gotta live up, wo now, wo now! 
'Cause the Father's time has come. 
Some people put the best outside; 
Some people keep the best inside; 
Some people can't stand up strong; 
Some people won't wait for long. 
 
(Na na na na na!) Na na na, na na na na! 
We're the survivors 
In this age of technological inhumanity (Black survival), 
Scientific atrocity (survivors), 
Atomic misphilosophy (Black survival), 
Nuclear misenergy (survivors): 
It's a world that forces lifelong insecurity (Black survival). 
 
Together now: 
(Na na na na na!) Na na na na na! (Na na na na na!) 
We're the survivors, yeah! 
We're the survivors! 
Yes, the Black survivors! 
We're the survivors: 
A good man is never honoured (survivors) 
in his own yountry (Black survival). 
Nothing change, nothing strange (survivors). 
Nothing change, nothing strange (Black survivors). 
We got to survive, y'all! (survivors) 
 


 


TALKIN' BLUES

 Yeah! Oh, yeah! Now! 
Cold ground was my bed last night (bed last night) 
And rock was my pillow, too; (doo oo oo oo oo!) 
Cold ground was my bed last night (bed last night) 
And rock was my pillow, too. Yeah! 
 
I'm saying: talkin' blues (talkin' blues), 
talkin' blues (talkin' blues); 
They say your feet is just too big for your shoes. (shoe oo oo oo oo) 
Talkin' blues (talkin' blues), talkin' blues (talkin' blues): 
Your feet is just too big for your shoes. (shoe oo oo oo oo) 
 
Yeah, I've been down on the rock for so long, (so long) 
I seem to wear a permanent screw; (screw oo oo oo oo) 
I've been down on the rock for so long, (so long) 
I seem to wear a permanent screw. (screw oo oo oo oo) 
But a I I'm gonna stare in the sun, 
Let the rays shine in my eyes. 
I I'm a gonna take a just a one step more 
'Cause I feel like bombin' a church 
Now now that you know that the preacher is lyin'. 
So who's gonna stay at home 
When when the freedom fighters are fighting? 
 
Talkin' blues (talkin' blues), talkin' blues (talkin' blues): 
They say your feet is just too big for your shoes, woe oh oh oh! 
Talkin' blues (talkin' blues), keep on talkin' blues (talkin' blues); 
They say you hear what they say 
Didn't you hear? 
 
Cold ground was my bed (bed last night), 
Rockstone rockstone rockstone was my pillow; 
Cold ground was my bed last night (bed last night), 
And rock was my pillow, too. 
 
Sayin': (talkin' blues, talkin' blues): 
I seem to wear a permanent screw permanent screw. 
Talkin' blues (talkin' blues), talkin' blues (talkin' blues): 
Feet is just too big for your shoes. (shoe oo oo oo oo) 
 


 

THE HEATHEN

 De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
 
Rise up fallen fighters; 
Rise and take your stance again. 
'Tis he who fight and run away 
Live to fight another day. 
With de heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
 
As a man sow, shall he reap 
And I know that talk is cheap. 
But the hotter the battle 
A the sweeter Jah victory. 
With de heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
 
 Guitar solo 
 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
 
 Rise up, fallen fighters: 
Rise and take your stance again. 
'Tis he who fight and run away 
Live to fight another day. 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back dey 'pon de wall! 
De heathen back, yeah, 'pon de wall! 
 


 


THEM BELLY FULL

 Na na na na na na na na; 
Na na na na na na na na; 
Na na na na na na na na; 
Na na na na na na na na. 
 
Them belly full, but we hungry; 
A hungry mob is a angry mob. 
A rain a fall, but the dirt it tough; 
A yot a yook, but d' yood no 'nough. 
 
You're gonna dance to Jah music, dance; 
We're gonna dance to Jah music, dance, oh ooh! 
 
Forget your troubles and dance! 
Forget your sorrows and dance! 
Forget your sickness and dance! 
Forget your weakness and dance! 
 
Cost of livin' gets so high, 
Rich and poor they start to cry: 
Now the weak must get strong; 
They say, Oh, what a tribulation! 
Them belly full, but we hungry; 
A hungry mob is a angry mob. 
A rain a fall, but the dirt it tough; 
A pot a yook, but d' yood* no 'nough. 
 
We're gonna chuck to Jah music chuckin'; 
We're chuckin' to Jah music we're chuckin'. 
 
 Guitar solo 
 
A belly full, but them hungry; 
A hungry mob is a angry mob. 
A rain a fall, but the dirt it tough; 
A pot a cook, but d' food* no 'nough. 
A hungry man is a angry man; 
A rain a fall, but the dirt it tough; 
A pot a yook, but you no 'nough' 
A rain a fall, but the dirt it tough. 
A pot a cook, but you no 'nough; 
A hungry mob is a angry mob; 
A hungry mob is a angry mob. 
 

 


THERE SHE GOES

 There she goes with the pieces from my heart 
There she goes and now my teardrops start 
And ere I go once again 
Tru deese loonely eartaches and pain 
That s all remain all remain 
Now I know love is a guessin game 
She goes with the pieces from my heart 
There she goes and now my teardrops start 
Who s gonna put back the pieces to my broken heart 
Once again once again now I know this could be the end 
And she gone with the pieces of my heart 
There she goes and now my teardrops start 
And here I go once again 
Tru deese loonely eartaches and pains 
That s all remain 
Now I know this could be the end 
She goes wid de pieces from my eart 
There she goes and now my teardrops start

 



THREE LITTLE BIRDS

 Don't worry about a thing, 
'Cause every little thing gonna be all right. 
Singin': Don't worry about a thing, 
'Cause every little thing gonna be all right! 
 
Rise up this mornin', 
Smiled with the risin' sun, 
Three little birds 
Pitch by my doorstep 
Singin' sweet songs 
Of melodies pure and true, 
Sayin', ( This is my message to you ou ou: ) 
 
Singin': Don't worry 'bout a thing, 
'Cause every little thing gonna be all right. 
Singin': Don't worry (don't worry) 'bout a thing, 
'Cause every little thing gonna be all right! 
 
Rise up this mornin', 
Smiled with the risin' sun, 
Three little birds 
Pitch by my doorstep 
Singin' sweet songs 
Of melodies pure and true, 
Sayin', This is my message to you ou ou: 
 
Singin': Don't worry about a thing, worry about a thing, oh! 
Every little thing gonna be all right. Don't worry! 
Singin': Don't worry about a thing I won't worry! 
 'Cause every little thing gonna be all right. 
 
Singin': Don't worry about a thing, 
'Cause every little thing gonna be all right I won't worry! 
Singin': Don't worry about a thing, 
'Cause every little thing gonna be all right. 
Singin': Don't worry about a thing, oh no! 
'Cause every little thing gonna be all right! 
 


 

TIME WILL TELL

 Mm mm mm mm mm hm! Ooh oo oo oo er. Mm mm mm. 
Jah would never give the power to a baldhead 
Run come crucify the Dread. 
 
Time alone oh, time will tell: 
Think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell; 
Think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell; 
Think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell. 
Time alone oh, time will tell: 
Ya think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell. 
 
Back them up; oh, not the brothers, 
But the ones who sets 'em up. 
 
Time alone oh, time will tell: 
Think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell; 
Think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell; 
Think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell. 
Time alone oh, time will tell: 
Ya think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell. 
 
Mm mm. Mm mm. 
Oh, ma ................... 
Oh, ma ................... 
Oh, ma children are cryin'. 
Oh, children, weep no more! 
Oh, ma sycamore tree, saw the freedom tree. 
All you ... have spoke: 
Oh, children, weep no more; 
Weep no more: children, weep no more! 
 
Jah would never give the power to a baldhead 
Run come crucify the Dread. 
 
Time alone oh, time will tell: 
Think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell; 
Think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell; 
Think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell. 
Time alone oh, time will tell: 
Think you're in heaven, but ya living in hell. 
 

TOP RANKIN'

 They don't want to see us unite: 
All they want us to do is keep on fussing and fighting. 
They don't want to see us live together: 
All they want us to do is keep on killing one another. 
 
Top rankin', top rankin': 
Are you skankin' (skankin', skankin');? 
Are you skankin' (skankin', skankin');? 
Wo ho, top rankin' (top rankin');, 'Ow, did you mean what you say now? 
Are you 'ow are you (rankin', rankin'); 
are ya Lord, Lord, Lord! (skankin', skankin');? 
 
They say the blood runs; 
And it runs through our line, 
And our hearts, heart of hearts divine, eh! 
And John saw them comin', ooh! a with the truth 
From an ancient time. 
 
The brotherly love (brotherly love), the sisterly love (sisterly love) 
I feel this morning; I feel this morning: 
Brotherly love (brotherly love), the sisterly love (sisterly love) 
I feel this morning, this morning. Hey! 
 
They don't want us to unite: 
All they want us to do is keep on fussing and fighting. 
They don't want to see us live together; 
All they want us to do is keep on killing one another. 
 
Top rankin' (top rankin');! 
Did ya mean what you say now (top rankin');? 
Are you skankin' (skankin', skankin');? 
Are you skankin' (skankin', skankin');? 
Top rankin' (top ranking), 
Did you (top rankin'); mean what you say (top rankin');? 
Are you (rankin', rankin)? 
Are you (skankin', skankin');? 
Top rankin' (top rankin');; 
Top rankin' (top rankin');; 
Are you (skankin', skankin');? 
'Ow are you (skankin', skankin');? 
 


 



TURN YOUR LIGHTS DOWN LOW

 Turn your lights down low 
And pull your window curtains; 
Oh, let Jah moon come shining in 
Into our life again, 
Sayin': ooh, it's been a long, long (long, long, long, long) time; 
I kept this message for you, girl, 
But it seems I was never on time; 
Still I wanna get through to you, girlie, 
On time on time. 
I want to give you some love (good, good lovin');; 
I want to give you some good, good lovin' (good, good lovin');. 
Oh, I oh, I oh, I, 
Say, I want to give you some good, good lovin' (good, good lovin');: 
Turn your lights down low; 
Never try to resist, oh no! 
Oh, let my love come tumbling in 
Into our life again, 
Sayin': ooh, I love ya! 
And I want you to know right now, 
I love ya! 
And I want you to know right now, 
'Cause I that I 
I want to give you some love, oh ooh! 
I want to give you some good, good lovin'; 
Oh, I I want to give you some love; 
Sayin': I want to give you some good, good lovin': 
Turn your lights down low, wo oh! 
Never never try to resist, oh no! 
Ooh, let my love ooh, let my love come tumbling in 
Into our life again. 
Oh, I want to give you some good, good lovin' (good, good lovin');. 


 


WAITING IN VAIN

 1, 2, 3: 
 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love. 
From the very first time I rest my eyes on you, girl, 
My heart says follow t'rough. 
But I know, now, that I'm way down on your line, 
But the waitin' feel is fine: 
So don't treat me like a puppet on a string, 
'Cause I know I have to do my thing. 
Don't talk to me as if you think I'm dumb; 
I wanna know when you're gonna come soon. 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love, 
'Cause if summer is here, 
I'm still waiting there; 
Winter is here, 
And I'm still waiting there. 
 
 Guitar solo 
 
Like I said: 
It's been three years since I'm knockin' on your door, 
And I still can knock some more: 
Ooh girl, ooh girl, is it feasible? 
I wanna know now, for I to knock some more. 
Ya see, in life I know there's lots of grief, 
But your love is my relief: 
Tears in my eyes burn tears in my eyes burn 
While I'm waiting while I'm waiting for my turn, 
See! 
 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love, oh! 
I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna wait in vain. 
I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna wait in vain. 
No, I don't wanna (I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna I don't wanna wait in vain) 
No I no I (I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't 
wanna I don't wanna wait in vain) 
No, no no, I, no, I (I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna I don't wanna wait in vain) 
It's your love that I'm waiting on (I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna wait in vain); 
It's me love that you're running from. 
It's Jah love that I'm waiting on (I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna wait in vain); 
It's me love that you're running from. 
 


 

 1, 2, 3: 
 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love. 
From the very first time I rest my eyes on you, girl, 
My heart says follow t'rough. 
But I know, now, that I'm way down on your line, 
But the waitin' feel is fine: 
So don't treat me like a puppet on a string, 
'Cause I know I have to do my thing. 
Don't talk to me as if you think I'm dumb; 
I wanna know when you're gonna come soon. 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love, 
'Cause if summer is here, 
I'm still waiting there; 
Winter is here, 
And I'm still waiting there. 
 
 Guitar solo 
 
Like I said: 
It's been three years since I'm knockin' on your door, 
And I still can knock some more: 
Ooh girl, ooh girl, is it feasible? 
I wanna know now, for I to knock some more. 
Ya see, in life I know there's lots of grief, 
But your love is my relief: 
Tears in my eyes burn tears in my eyes burn 
While I'm waiting while I'm waiting for my turn, 
See! 
 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love; 
I don't wanna wait in vain for your love, oh! 
I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna wait in vain. 
I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna wait in vain. 
No, I don't wanna (I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna I don't wanna wait in vain) 
No I no I (I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't 
wanna I don't wanna wait in vain) 
No, no no, I, no, I (I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna I don't wanna wait in vain) 
It's your love that I'm waiting on (I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna wait in vain); 
It's me love that you're running from. 
It's Jah love that I'm waiting on (I don't wanna I don't wanna 
I don't wanna I don't wanna I don't wanna wait in vain); 
It's me love that you're running from. 
 


 



WAKE UP AND LIVE

 One, two, three, four! 
 
Wake up and live, y'all, 
Wake up and live! 
Wake up and live now! 
Wake up and live! 
 
Life is one big road with lots of signs, 
So when you riding through the ruts, don't you complicate your mind: 
Flee from hate, mischief and jealousy! 
Don't bury your thoughts; put your vision to reality, yeah! 
 
All together now: 
Wake up and live (wake up and live, y'all), 
Wake up and live (wake up and live), 
wake up and wake up and live, yeah! (wake up and live now), 
Wake up and (wake up and live) wake up and live! 
Rise ye mighty people, ye ah! 
There's work to be done, 
So let's do it a little by little: 
Rise from your sleepless slumber! Yes, yeah! Yes, yeah! 
We're more than sand on the seashore, 
We're more than numbers. 
All together now: 
Wake up and live now, y'all! 
(Wake up and live) Wake up and live! 
Wake up and live, y'all! 
(Wake up and live) Wake up and live now! 
You see, one one cocoa full a basket, 
Whey they use you live big today: tomorrow you buried in a casket. 
One one cocoa full a basket, yeah, yes! 
Whey they use you live big today: tomorrow you bury in a casket. 
 
W'all together now: 
(Wake up and live now!) Wake up and live! Oh! Yeah eah! 
(Wake up and live!) Uh! 
(Wake up and live now!) Wake up and live! 
(Wake up and live) Keep on playin'! 
(Wake up and live, y'all) Uh! Yeah! Yeah! 
(Wake up and live!) 
(Wake up and live now!) 
(Wake up and live!) Break it down! 
 
/ Saxophone solo 
Come on, man! 
How is it feelin' over there? 
(Wake up and live now) All right! 
(Wake up and live!) Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. 
Uh! 
Come on, man! 
You gotta wake up and live! 
 Saxophone solo / 
 
Life is one big road with lots of signs, yes! 
So when you riding through the ruts, don't you complicate your mind: 
Flee from hate, mischief and jealousy! 
Don't bury your thoughts; put your dream to reality, yeah! 
 
W'all together now: 
(Wake up and live, y'all) 
(Wake up and live!) Wake up and live, yea eah! 
(Wake up and live now!) 
(Wake up and live!) 
Wake up and live now! 
(Wake up and live) Wo oh! 
Wake up and live now! 
Wake up and live 
 


 


WANT MORE

 Now you get what you want, 
Do you want more? (want more) 
Now you get what you want, 
Do you want more? (want more) 
 
You think it's the end, 
But it's just the beginning. 
You think it's the end, 
But it's just the beginning. 
Go down back biter, down back bite; down back biter, down back bite! 
Down back biter, down back biter; down back biter, down back bite! 
 
They stab you in the back 
And they claim that you're not looking. 
But Jah have them in the region 
In the valley of decision. 
They stab you in the back 
And they claim that you're not looking. 
But Jah have them in the region 
In the valley of decision 
In the valley of decision. 
Go down back biter, down back bite, down back biter, down back bite! 
 
Now you get, what you want, 
Do you want more? 
Now you get, what you want, 
Do you want more? 
Now you get, what you want, 
Do you want more? 
You think it's the end: 
Do you want more? 
 
 Guitar solo 
 
Go down back biter, down back bite, down back biter, down back bite! 
Go down back biter, down back bite, down back biter, down back bite! 
 
They stab you in the back 
And they claim that you're not looking. 
But Jah have them in the region 
In the valley of decision. 
Now: what you want? 
Want more? Want more? 
Now: what you get? 
Want more? Want more? 
Now Now: do you want more? 
You think it's the end: (think it's the end) 
Do you want more? (want more) (you think it's the end) 
 
 


 


WANT MORE

Now you get what you want,  Do you want more? (want more)  Now you get what you want,  Do you want more? (want more)    You think it's the end,  But it's just the beginning.  You think it's the end,  But it's just the beginning.  Go down back biter, down back bite; down back biter, down back bite!  Down back biter, down back biter; down back biter, down back bite!    They stab you in the back  And they claim that you're not looking.  But Jah have them in the region  In the valley of decision.  They stab you in the back  And they claim that you're not looking.  But Jah have them in the region  In the valley of decision    In the valley of decision.  Go down back biter, down back bite, down back biter, down back bite!    Now you get, what you want,  Do you want more?  Now you get, what you want,  Do you want more?  Now you get, what you want,  Do you want more?  You think it's the end:  Do you want more?        Guitar solo          Go down back biter, down back bite, down back biter, down back bite!  Go down back biter, down back bite, down back biter, down back bite!    They stab you in the back  And they claim that you're not looking.  But Jah have them in the region  In the valley of decision.  Now: what you want?  Want more? Want more?  Now: what you get?  Want more? Want more?  Now  Now: do you want more?  You think it's the end: (think it's the end)  Do you want more? (want more) (you think it's the end)          Instrumental break          (Now: what you want?  Want more? Want more?  Now: what you get?  Want more? Want more?)       


WAR

 Until the philosophy which hold one race superior 
And another 
Inferior 
Is finally 
And permanently 
Discredited 
And abandoned 
Everywhere is war 
Me say war. 
 
That until there no longer 
First class and second class citizens of any nation 
Until the colour of a man's skin 
Is of no more significance than the colour of his eyes 
Me say war. 
 
That until the basic human rights 
Are equally guaranteed to all, 
Without regard to race 
Dis a war. 
 
That until that day 
The dream of lasting peace, 
World citizenship 
Rule of international morality 
Will remain in but a fleeting illusion to be pursued, 
But never attained 
Now everywhere is war war. 
 
And until the ignoble and unhappy regimes 
that hold our brothers in Angola, 
In Mozambique, 
South Africa 
Sub human bondage 
Have been toppled, 
Utterly destroyed 
Well, everywhere is war 
Me say war. 
 
War in the east, 
War in the west, 
War up north, 
War down south 
War war 
Rumours of war. 
And until that day, 
The African continent 
Will not know peace, 
We Africans will fight we find it necessary 
And we know we shall win 
As we are confident 
In the victory 
 
Of good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
Good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
Good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
 


 

WAR

 Until the philosophy which hold one race superior 
And another 
Inferior 
Is finally 
And permanently 
Discredited 
And abandoned 
Everywhere is war 
Me say war. 
 
That until there no longer 
First class and second class citizens of any nation 
Until the colour of a man's skin 
Is of no more significance than the colour of his eyes 
Me say war. 
 
That until the basic human rights 
Are equally guaranteed to all, 
Without regard to race 
Dis a war. 
 
That until that day 
The dream of lasting peace, 
World citizenship 
Rule of international morality 
Will remain in but a fleeting illusion to be pursued, 
But never attained 
Now everywhere is war war. 
 
And until the ignoble and unhappy regimes 
that hold our brothers in Angola, 
In Mozambique, 
South Africa 
Sub human bondage 
Have been toppled, 
Utterly destroyed 
Well, everywhere is war 
Me say war. 
 
War in the east, 
War in the west, 
War up north, 
War down south 
War war 
Rumours of war. 
And until that day, 
The African continent 
Will not know peace, 
We Africans will fight we find it necessary 
And we know we shall win 
As we are confident 
In the victory 
 
Of good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
Good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
Good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
 


 


WAR

 Until the philosophy which hold one race superior 
And another 
Inferior 
Is finally 
And permanently 
Discredited 
And abandoned 
Everywhere is war 
Me say war. 
 
That until there no longer 
First class and second class citizens of any nation 
Until the colour of a man's skin 
Is of no more significance than the colour of his eyes 
Me say war. 
 
That until the basic human rights 
Are equally guaranteed to all, 
Without regard to race 
Dis a war. 
 
That until that day 
The dream of lasting peace, 
World citizenship 
Rule of international morality 
Will remain in but a fleeting illusion to be pursued, 
But never attained 
Now everywhere is war war. 
 
And until the ignoble and unhappy regimes 
that hold our brothers in Angola, 
In Mozambique, 
South Africa 
Sub human bondage 
Have been toppled, 
Utterly destroyed 
Well, everywhere is war 
Me say war. 
 
War in the east, 
War in the west, 
War up north, 
War down south 
War war 
Rumours of war. 
And until that day, 
The African continent 
Will not know peace, 
We Africans will fight we find it necessary 
And we know we shall win 
As we are confident 
In the victory 
 
Of good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
Good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
Good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
 


 


WAR

 Until the philosophy which hold one race superior 
And another 
Inferior 
Is finally 
And permanently 
Discredited 
And abandoned 
Everywhere is war 
Me say war. 
 
That until there no longer 
First class and second class citizens of any nation 
Until the colour of a man's skin 
Is of no more significance than the colour of his eyes 
Me say war. 
 
That until the basic human rights 
Are equally guaranteed to all, 
Without regard to race 
Dis a war. 
 
That until that day 
The dream of lasting peace, 
World citizenship 
Rule of international morality 
Will remain in but a fleeting illusion to be pursued, 
But never attained 
Now everywhere is war war. 
 
And until the ignoble and unhappy regimes 
that hold our brothers in Angola, 
In Mozambique, 
South Africa 
Sub human bondage 
Have been toppled, 
Utterly destroyed 
Well, everywhere is war 
Me say war. 
 
War in the east, 
War in the west, 
War up north, 
War down south 
War war 
Rumours of war. 
And until that day, 
The African continent 
Will not know peace, 
We Africans will fight we find it necessary 
And we know we shall win 
As we are confident 
In the victory 
 
Of good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
Good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
Good over evil 
Good over evil, yeah! 
 


 


WE AND DEM

 We no know how we and dem a go work this out, oy! 
We no know how we and dem a go work it out. 
 
But someone will 'ave to pay 
For the innocent blood 
That they shed every day, 
Oh, children, mark my word; 
It's what the Bible say, yeah! yeah! 
 
Oh, we no know how we and dem a go work this out; 
We no know how we and dem a go work it out. 
 
But in the beginning Jah created everythin' (oo oo oo oo ooh), 
Givin' man dominion over all things. 
But now it's too late, 
You see, men has lost their faith (oo oo oo oo ooh), hey ey hey! 
Eating up all the flesh from off the earth, eh! 
 
We no know how we and dem a go work this out (we no know); 
We no know how we and dem a go work this out (no, we don't know); 
Dub da dub da dub! 
Dub a dippidi doop de doo! 
Nim a nummany num na noo! 
Num a nummana num da nay! 
Dippy dippy dippy: dip de dub de day! 
Dip a dubbada dub da day! 
 
But I say: we no know how we and dem a go work it out: 
them a flesh and bone! 
We no know how we and dem a go work it out. 
 
But we now have no friends 
In a high society, yea a eah! 
We no have no friends; 
Oh, mark my identity; 
We no have no friends. Oh oh! Yeah! 
 
We no know how we and dem a go work this out (no, we no know); 
We no know how we and dem a go work this out (we no know); 
We no know how we and dem a go work it out (no, we don't know); 
(We no know how we and dem a go work this out.) Rasta! 
(We no know how we and dem a go work this out.) Ilyabom! 
 


 


WHO THE CAP FIT

 Man to man is so unjust, children: 
Ya don't know who to trust. 
Your worst enemy could be your best friend, 
And your best friend your worse enemy. 
 
Some will eat and drink with you, 
Then behind them su su 'pon you. 
Only your friend know your secrets, 
So only he could reveal it. 
And who the cap fit, let them wear it! 
Who the cap fit, let them wear it! 
Said I throw me corn, me no call no fowl; 
I saying, Cook cook cook, cluk cluk cluk. 
 
Some will hate you, pretend they love you now, 
Then behind they try to eliminate you. 
But who Jah bless, no one curse; 
Thank God, we're past the worse. 
Hypocrites and parasites 
Will come up and take a bite. 
And if your night should turn to day, 
A lot of people would run away. 
And who the stock fit let them wear it! 
Who the (cap fit) let them (wear it)! 
 
And then a gonna throw me corn, 
And then a gonna call no fowl, 
And then a gonna Cook cook cook, cluk cluk cluk. 
 
 Instrumental break 
 
Some will eat and drink with you, 
Then behind them su su 'pon you, yeah! 
And if night should turn to day, now, 
A lot of people would run away, yeah! 
And who the cap fit, let them wear it! 
Who the cap fit, let them wear it! 
Throw me corn, me no call no fowl; 
A saying: Cook cook cook, cluk cluk cluk. 
... : Cook cook cook, cluk cluk cluk. 
Throw me corn (cook cook cook); 
Me call no fowl (cluk cluk cluk) 
 






WHO THE CAP FIT

 Man to man is so unjust, children: 
Ya don't know who to trust. 
Your worst enemy could be your best friend, 
And your best friend your worse enemy. 
 
Some will eat and drink with you, 
Then behind them su su 'pon you. 
Only your friend know your secrets, 
So only he could reveal it. 
And who the cap fit, let them wear it! 
Who the cap fit, let them wear it! 
Said I throw me corn, me no call no fowl; 
I saying, Cook cook cook, cluk cluk cluk. 
 
Some will hate you, pretend they love you now, 
Then behind they try to eliminate you. 
But who Jah bless, no one curse; 
Thank God, we're past the worse. 
Hypocrites and parasites 
Will come up and take a bite. 
And if your night should turn to day, 
A lot of people would run away. 
And who the stock fit let them wear it! 
Who the (cap fit) let them (wear it)! 
 
And then a gonna throw me corn, 
And then a gonna call no fowl, 
And then a gonna Cook cook cook, cluk cluk cluk. 
 
 Instrumental break 
 
Some will eat and drink with you, 
Then behind them su su 'pon you, yeah! 
And if night should turn to day, now, 
A lot of people would run away, yeah! 
And who the cap fit, let them wear it! 
Who the cap fit, let them wear it! 
Throw me corn, me no call no fowl; 
A saying: Cook cook cook, cluk cluk cluk. 
... : Cook cook cook, cluk cluk cluk. 
Throw me corn (cook cook cook); 
Me call no fowl (cluk cluk cluk) 


      


WORK

 We, Jah people, can make it work; 
Come together and make it work, yeah! 
We can make it work; 
We can make it work. 
 
Five days to go: working for the next day; 
Four days to go: working for the next day; 
Say we got: three days to go now: working for the next day; 
Two days to go (ooh): working for the next day, yeah. 
Say we got: one day to go: working for the 
Every day is work work work work! 
 
We can make it work; 
We can make it work. 
 
 Short guitar break 
 
We, Jah people, can make it work; 
Come together and make it work. 
We can make it work; 
We can make it work. 
 
We got: five days to go work, oh! working for the next day, eh! 
Four days to go: working for the 
Three days to go now: working for the next day, yeah! 
Two days to go: working for the next day 
Say we got: one day to go now: working for 
Every day is work, wotcha wa! 
(Work!) I work in the mid day sun; 
(Work!) I work till the evening come! 
(Work!) If ya ain't got nothing to do! 
(Work!) Ooh ooh ooh oo oo ooh! 
(Work!) 
 


 


ZIMBABWE

 Every man gotta right to decide his own destiny, 
And in this judgement there is no partiality. 
So arm in arms, with arms, we'll fight this little struggle, 
'Cause that's the only way we can overcome our little trouble. 
 
Brother, you're right, you're right, 
You're right, you're right, you're so right! 
We gon' fight (we gon' fight), we'll have to fight (we gon' fight), 
We gonna fight (we gon' fight), fight for our rights! 
 
Natty Dread it in a (Zimbabwe); 
Set it up in (Zimbabwe); 
Mash it up a in a Zimbabwe (Zimbabwe); 
Africans a liberate (Zimbabwe), yeah. 
 
No more internal power struggle; 
We come together to overcome the little trouble. 
Soon we'll find out who is the real revolutionary, 
'Cause I don't want my people to be contrary. 
 
And, brother, you're right, you're right, 
You're right, you're right, you're so right! 
We'll 'ave to fight (we gon' fight), we gonna fight (we gon' fight) 
We'll 'ave to fight (we gon' fight), fighting for our rights! 
 
Mash it up in a (Zimbabwe); 
Natty trash it in a (Zimbabwe); 
Africans a liberate Zimbabwe (Zimbabwe); 
I'n'I a liberate Zimbabwe. 
 
(Brother, you're right,) you're right, 
You're right, you're right, you're so right! 
We gon' fight (we gon' fight), we'll 'ave to fight (we gon' fight), 
We gonna fight (we gon' fight), fighting for our rights! 
 
To divide and rule could only tear us apart; 
In everyman chest, mm there beats a heart. 
So soon we'll find out who is the real revolutionaries; 
And I don't want my people to be tricked by mercenaries. 
 
Brother, you're right, you're right, 
You're right, you're right, you're so right! 
We'll 'ave to fight (we gon' fight), we gonna fight (we gon' fight), 
We'll 'ave to fight (we gon' fight), fighting for our rights! 
 
Natty trash it in a Zimbabwe (Zimbabwe); 
Mash it up in a Zimbabwe (Zimbabwe); 
Set it up in a Zimbabwe (Zimbabwe); 
Africans a liberate Zimbabwe (Zimbabwe); 
Africans a liberate Zimbabwe (Zimbabwe); 
Natty dub it in a Zimbabwe (Zimbabwe). 
 
Set it up in a Zimbabwe (Zimbabwe); 
Africans a liberate Zimbabwe (Zimbabwe); 
Every man got a right to decide his own destiny 
 







Soul train is coming our way; 
