
@ Nothing


For Carl Solomon 

I

I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness, starving hysterical naked,

dragging themselves through the negro streets at dawn looking for an angry fix,

angelheaded hipsters burning for the ancient heavenly connection to the starry dynamo in the machinery of night,

who poverty and tatters and hollow-eyed and high sat up smoking in the supernatural darkness of cold-water flats floating across the tops of cities contemplating jazz,

who bared their brains to Heaven under the El and saw Mohammedan angels staggering on tenement roofs illuminated,

who passed through universities with radiant eyes hallucinating Arkansas and Blake-light tragedy among the scholars of war,

who were expelled from the academies for crazy & publishing obscene odes on the windows of the skull,

who cowered in unshaven rooms in underwear, burning their money in wastebaskets and listening to the Terror through the wall,

who got busted in their pubic beards returning through Laredo with a belt of marijuana for New York,

who ate fire in paint hotels or drank turpentine in Paradise Alley, death, or purgatoried their torsos night after night

with dreams, with drugs, with waking nightmares, alcohol and cock and endless balls,

incomparable blind streets of shuddering cloud and lightning in the mind leaping towards poles of Canada & Paterson, illuminating all the motionless world of Time between,

Peyote solidities of halls, backyard green tree cemetery dawns, wine drunkenness over the rooftops, storefront boroughs of teahead joyride neon blinking traffic light, sun and moon and tree vibrations in the roaring winter dusks of Brooklyn, ashcan rantings and kind king light of mind,

who chained themselves to subways for the endless ride from Battery to holy Bronx on benzedrine until the noise of wheels and children brought them down shuddering mouth-wracked and battered bleak of brain all drained of brilliance in the drear light of Zoo,

who sank all night in submarine light of Bickford's floated out and sat through the stale beer afternoon in desolate Fugazzi's, listening to the crack of doom on the hydrogen jukebox,

who talked continuously seventy hours from park to pad to bar to Bellevue to museum to the Brooklyn Bridge,

a lost batallion of platonic conversationalists jumping down the stoops off fire escapes off windowsills off Empire State out of the moon

yacketayakking screaming vomiting whispering facts and memories and anecdotes and eyeball kicks and shocks of hospitals and jails and wars,

whose intellects disgorged in total recall for seven days and nights with brilliant eyes, meat for the Synagogue cast on the pavement,

who vanished into nowhere Zen New Jersey leaving a trail of ambiguous picture postcards of Atlantic City Hall,

suffering Eastern sweats and Tangerian bone-grindings and migraines of China under junk-withdrawal in Newark's bleak furnished room,

who wandered around and around at midnight in the railway yard wondering where to go, and went, leaving no broken hearts,

who lit cigarettes in boxcars boxcars boxcars racketing through snow toward lonesome farms in grandfather night,

who studied Plotinus Poe St John of the Cross telepathy and bop kabbalah because the universe instinctively vibrated at their feet in Kansas,

who loned it through the streets of Idaho seeking visionary indian angels who were visionary indian angels,

who thought they were only mad when Baltimore gleamed in supernatural ecstasy,

who jumped in limousines with the Chinaman of Oklahoma on the impulse of winter midnight streetlight smalltown rain,

who lounged hungry and lonesome through Houston seeking jazz or sex or soup, and followed the brilliant Spaniard to converse about America and Eternity, a hopeless task, and so took ship to Africa,

who disappeared into the volcanoes of Mexico leaving nothing behind but the shadow of dungarees and the larva and ash of poetry scattered in fireplace Chicago,

who reappeared on the West Coast investigating the FBI in beards and shorts with big pacifist eyes sexy in their dark skin passing out incomprehensible leaflets,

who burned cigarette holes in their arms protesting the narcotic tobacco haze of Capitalism, who distributed Supercommunist pamphlets in Union Square weeping and undressing while the sirens of Los Alamos wailed them down, and wailed down Wall, and the Staten Island ferry also wailed,

who broke down crying in white gymnasiums naked and trembling before the machinery of other skeletons,

who bit detectives in the neck and shrieked with delight in policecars for committing no crime but their own wild cooking pederasty and intoxication,

who howled on their knees in the subway and were dragged off the roof waving genitals and manuscripts,

who let themselves be fucked in the ass by saintly motorcyclists, and screamed with joy,

who blew and were blown by those human seraphim, the sailors, caresses of Atlantic and Caribbean love,

who balled in the morning in the evenings in rosegardens and the grass of public parks and cemeteries scattering their semen freely to whomever come who may, 

who hiccuped endlessly trying to giggle but wound up with a sob behind a partition in a Turkish Bath when the blond & naked angel came to pierce them with a sword,

who lost their loveboys to the three old shrews of fate the one eyed shrew of the heterosexual dollar the one eyed shrew that winks out of the womb and the one eyed shrew that does nothing but sit on her ass and snip the intellectual golden threads of the craftsman's loom,

who copulated ecstatic and insatiate and fell off the bed, and continued along the floor and down the hall and ended fainting on the wall with a vision of ultimate cunt and come eluding the last gyzym of consciousness,

who sweetened the snatches of a million girls trembling in the sunset, and were red eyed in the morning but were prepared to sweeten the snatch of the sunrise, flashing buttocks under barns and naked in the lake,

who went out whoring through Colorado in myriad stolen night-cars, N.C., secret hero of these poems, cocksman and Adonis of Denver—joy to the memory of his innumerable lays of girls in empty lots & diner backyards, moviehouses' rickety rows, on mountaintops in caves or with gaunt waitresses in familiar roadside lonely petticoat upliftings & especially secret gas-station solipsisms of johns, & hometown alleys too,

who faded out in vast sordid movies, were shifted in dreams, woke on a sudden Manhattan, and picked themselves up out of basements hungover with heartless Tokay and horrors of Third Avenue iron dreams & stumbled to unemployment offices,

who walked all night with their shoes full of blood on the snowbank docks waiting for a door in the East River to open full of steamheat and opium,

who created great suicidal dramas on the appartment cliff-banks of the Hudson under the wartime blue floodlight of the moon & their heads shall be crowned with laurel in oblivion,

who ate the lamb stew of the imagination or digested the crab at the muddy bottom of the rivers of the Bowery,

who wept at the romance of the streets with their pushcarts full of onions and bad music,

who sat in boxes breathing in the darkness under the bridge, and rose up to build harpsichords in their lofts, who coughed on the sixth floor of Harlem crowned with flame under the tubercular sky surrounded by orange crates of theology,

who scribbled all night rocking and rolling over lofty incantations which in the yellow morning were stanzas of gibberish,

who cooked rotten animals lung heart feet tail borsht & tortillas dreaming of the pure vegetable kingdom,

who plunged themselves under meat trucks looking for an egg,

who threw their watches off the roof to cast their ballot for an Eternity outside of Time, & alarm clocks fell on their heads every day for the next decade,

who cut their wrists three times successfully unsuccessfully, gave up and were forced to open antique stores where they thought they were growing old and cried,

who were burned alive in their innocent flannel suits on Madison Avenue amid blasts of leaden verse & the tanked-up clatter of the iron regiments of fashion & the nitroglycerine shrieks of the fairies of advertising & the mustard gas of sinister intelligent editors, or were run down by the drunken taxicabs of Absolute Reality,

who jumped off the Brooklyn Bridge this actually happened and walked away unknown and forgotten into the ghostly daze of Chinatown soup alleyways & firetrucks, not even one free beer,

who sang out of their windows in despair, fell out of the subway window, jumped in the filthy Passaic, leaped on negroes, cried all over the street, danced on broken wineglasses barefoot smashed phonograph records of nostalgic European 1930s German jazz finished the whiskey and threw up groaning into the bloody toilet, moans in their ears and the blast of colossal steamwhistles,

who barreled down the highways of the past journeying to each other's hotrod-Golgotha jail-solitude watch Birmingham jazz incarnation,

who drove crosscountry seventytwo hours to find out if I had a vision or you had a vision or he had a vision to find out Eternity,

who journeyed to Denver, who died in Denver, who came back to Denver & waited in vain, who watched over Denver & brooded & loned in Denver and finally went away to find out the Time, & now Denver is lonesome for her heroes,

who fell on their knees in hopeless cathedrals praying for each other's salvation and light and breasts, until the soul illuminated its hair for a second,

who crashed through their minds in jail waiting for impossible criminals with golden heads and the charm of reality in their hearts who sang sweet blues to Alcatraz,

who retired to Mexico to cultivate a habit, or Rocky Mount to tender Buddha or Tangiers to boys or Southern Pacific to the black locomotive or Harvard to Narcissus to Woodlawn to the daisychain or grave,

who demanded sanity trials accusing the radio of hypnotism & were left with their insanity & their hands & a hung jury,

who threw potato salad at CCNY lecturerson Dadaism and subsequently presented themselves on the granite steps of the madhouse with the shaven heads and harlequin speech of suicide, demanding instantaneous lobotomy,

and who were given instead the concrete void of insulin Metrazol electricity hydrotherapy psychotherapy occupational therapy pingpong & amnesia,

who in humorless protest overturned only one symbolic pingpong table, resting briefly in catatonia,

returning years later truly bald except for a wig of blood, and tears and fingers, to the visible madman doom of the wards of the madtowns of the East,

Pilgrim State's Rockland's and Greystone's foetid halls, bickering with the echoes of the soul, rocking and rolling in the midnight solitude-bench dolmen-realms of love, dream of life a nightmare, bodies turned to stone as heavy as the moon,

with mother finally *****, and the last fantastic book flung out of the tenement window, and the last door closed at 4 A.M. and the last telephone slammed at the wall in reply and the last furnished room emptied down to the last piece of mental furniture, a yellow paper rose twisted on a wire hanger on the closet, and even that imaginary, nothing but a hopeful little bit of hallucination—

ah, Carl, while you are not safe I am not safe, and now you're really in the total animal soup of time—

and who therefore ran through the icy streets obsessed with a sudden flash of the alchemy of the use of the ellipse the catalog the meter & the vibrating plane,

who dreamt and made incarnate gaps in Time & Space through images juxtaposed, and trapped the archangel of the soulbetween 2 visual images and joined the elemental verbs and set the noun and dash of consciousness together jumping with sensation of Pater Omnipotens Aeterna Deus

to recreate the syntax and measure of poor human prose and stand before you speechless and intelligent and shaking with shame, rejected yet confessing out the soul to conform to the rhythm of thought in his naked and endless head,

the madman bum and angel beat in Time, unknown, yet putting down here what might be left to say in time come after death,

and rose incarnate in the ghostly clothes of jazz in the goldhorn shadow of the band and blew the suffering of America's naked mind for love into an eli eli lamma lamma sabacthani saxophone cry that shivered the cities down to the last radio

with the absolute heart of the poem butchered out of their own bodies good to eat a thousand years.


II

What sphinx of cement and aluminium bashed open their skulls and ate up their brains and imagination?

Moloch! Solitude! Filth! Ugliness! Ashcans and unobtainable dollars! Children screaming under the stairways! Boys sobbing in armies! Old men weeping in the parks!

Moloch! Moloch! Nightmare of Moloch! Moloch the loveless! Mental Moloch! Moloch the heavy judger of men!

Moloch the incomprehensible prison! Moloch the crossbone soulless jailhouse and Congress of sorrows! Moloch whose buildings are judgement! Moloch the vast stone of war! Moloch the stunned governments!

Moloch whose mind is pure machinery! Moloch whose blood is running money! Moloch whose fingers are ten armies! Moloch whose breast is a cannibal dynamo! Moloch whose ear is a smoking tomb!

Moloch whose eyes are a thousand blind windows! Moloch whose skyscrapers stand in the long streets like endless Jehovas! Moloch whose factories dream and choke in the fog! Moloch whose smokestacks and antennae crown the cities!

Moloch whose love is endless oil and stone! Moloch whose soul is electricity and banks! Moloch whose poverty is the specter of genius! Moloch whose fate is a cloud of sexless hydrogen! Moloch whose name is the Mind!

Moloch in whom I sit lonely! Moloch in whom I dream angels! Crazy in Moloch! Cocksucker in Moloch! Lacklove and manless in Moloch!

Moloch who entered my soul early! Moloch in whom I am a consciousness without a body! Moloch who frightened me out of my natural ecstasy! Moloch whom I abandon! Wake up in Moloch! Light streaming out of the sky!

Moloch! Moloch! Robot apartments! invisable suburbs! skeleton treasuries! blind capitals! demonic industries! spectral nations! invincible madhouses! granite cocks! monstrous bombs!

They broke their backs lifting Moloch to Heaven! Pavements, trees, radios, tons! lifting the city to Heaven which exists and is everywhere about us!

Visions! omens! hallucinations! miracles! ecstacies! gone down the American river!

Dreams! adorations! illuminations! religions! the whole boatload of sensitive bullshit!

Breakthroughs! over the river! flips and crucifixions! gone down the flood! Highs! Epiphanies! Despairs! Ten years' animal screams and suicides! Minds! New loves! Mad generation! down on the rocks of Time!

Real holy laughter in the river! They saw it all! the wild eyes! the holy yells! They bade farewell! They jumped off the roof! to solitude! waving! carrying flowers! Down to the river! into the street!


III

Carl Solomon! I'm with you in Rockland

         where you're madder than I am

I'm with you in Rockland

         where you must feel strange

I'm with you in Rockland

         where you imitate the shade of my mother

I'm with you in Rockland

         where you've murdered your twelve secretaries

I'm with you in Rockland

         where you laugh at this invisible humour

I'm with you in Rockland

         where we are great writers on the same dreadful typewriter

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where your condition has become serious and is reported on the radio

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where the faculties of the skull no longer admit the worms of the senses

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where you drink the tea of the breasts of the spinsters of Utica

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where you pun on the bodies of your nurses the harpies of the Bronx

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where you scream in a straightjacket that you're losing the game of actual pingpong of the abyss

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where you bang on the catatonic piano the soul is innocent and immortal it should never die ungodly in an armed madhouse

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where fifty more shocks will never return your soul to its body again from its pilgrimage to a cross in the void

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where you accuse your doctors of insanity and plot the Hebrew socialist revolution against the fascist national Golgotha

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where you will split the heavens of Long Island and resurrect your living human Jesus from the superhuman tomb

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where there are twentyfive thousand mad comrades all together singing the final stanzas of the Internationale

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where we hug and kiss the United States under our bedsheets the United States that coughs all night and won't let us sleep

I'm with you in Rockland 

         where we wake up electrified out of the coma by our own souls' airplanes roaring over the roof they've come to drop angelic bombs the hospital illuminates itself   imaginary walls collapse   O skinny legions run outside   O starry-spangled shock of mercy the eternal war is here   O victory forget your underwear we're free

I'm with you in Rockland 

         in my dreams you walk dripping from a sea-journey on the highway across America in tears to the door of my cottage in the Western night

 



URL http://alt.venus.co.uk/weed/writings/poems/agh.htm

 

 

Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! 
     Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! Holy! 
The world is holy! The soul is holy! The skin is holy! 
     The nose is holy! The tongue and cock and hand 
     and asshole holy! 
Everything is holy! everybody's holy! everywhere is 
     holy! everyday is in eternity! Everyman's an 
     angel! 
The bum's as holy as the seraphim! the madman is 
     holy as you my soul are holy! 
The typewriter is holy the poem is holy the voice is 
     holy the hearers are holy the ecstasy is holy! 
Holy Peter holy Allen holy Solomon holy Lucien holy 
     Kerouac holy Huncke holy Burroughs holy Cas- 
     sady holy the unknown buggered and suffering 
     beggars holy the hideous human angels! 
Holy my mother in the insane asylum! Holy the cocks 
     of the grandfathers of Kansas! 
Holy the groaning saxophone! Holy the bop 
     apocalypse! Holy the jazzbands marijuana 
     hipsters peace & junk & drums! 
Holy the solitudes of skyscrapers and pavements! Holy 
     the cafeterias filled with the millions! Holy the 
     mysterious rivers of tears under the streets! 
Holy the lone juggernaut! Holy the vast lamb of the 
     middle class! Holy the crazy shepherds of rebell- 
     ion! Who digs Los Angeles IS Los Angeles! 
Holy New York Holy San Francisco Holy Peoria & 
     Seattle Holy Paris Holy Tangiers Holy Moscow 
     Holy Istanbul! 
Holy time in eternity holy eternity in time holy the 
     clocks in space holy the fourth dimension holy 
     the fifth International holy the Angel in Moloch! 
Holy the sea holy the desert holy the railroad holy the 
     locomotive holy the visions holy the hallucina- 
     tions holy the miracles holy the eyeball holy the 
     abyss! 
Holy forgiveness! mercy! charity! faith! Holy! Ours! 
     bodies! suffering! magnanimity! 
Holy the supernatural extra brilliant intelligent 
     kindness of the soul! 



     Inside Dachau


1. big lies, small lies

Having lied to our German hosts about our plans 
for the day, Diane and I visited Dachau 
instead of searching for rare albums in Munich. 
Only a dozen visitors walked through the camp 
because we were months away from tourist season. 
The camp was austere. The museum was simple.

Once there, I had expected to feel simple 
emotions: hate, anger, sorrow. That was my plan. 
I would write poetry about how the season 
of winter found a perfect home in cold Dachau. 
I would be a Jewish man who died in the camp. 
I would be the ideal metaphor. Munich

would be a short train ride away from hell. Munich 
would take the blame. I thought it would all be simple 
but there were no easy answers inside the camp. 
The poems still took their forms, but my earlier plans 
seemed so selfish. What could I say about Dachau 
when I had never suffered through any season

inside its walls? Could I imagine a season 
of ash and snow, of flames and shallow graves? Munich 
is only a short train ride away from Dachau. 
If you can speak some German, it is a simple 
journey which requires coins and no other plans 
for the day. We lied about visiting the camp

to our German hosts, who always spoke of the camp 
as truthfully as they spoke about the seasons. 
Dachau is still Dachau. Our hosts have made no plans 
to believe otherwise. As we drove through Munich 
our hosts pointed out former Nazi homes, simply 
and quickly. "We are truly ashamed of Dachau,"

Mikael said, "but what about all the Dachaus
in the United States? What about the death camps 
in your country?" Yes, Mikael, you ask simple 
questions which are ignored, season after season. 
Mikael, I'm sorry we lied about Munich 
and Dachau. I'm sorry we lied about our plans.

Inside Dachau, you might believe winter will never end. You may lose faith in the change of seasons
because some of the men who built the camps still live in Argentina, in Washington, in Munich.
They live simple lives. They share bread with sons and daughters who have come to understand the master plan.

 

2. history as the home movie

it begins and ends with ash, though we insist
on ignoring the shared fires in our past.
We attempt to erase our names from the list
            that begins and ends with ash.
We ignore the war until we are the last 
standing, until we are the last to persist 
in denial, as we are shipped off to camps

where we all are stripped, and our dark bodies lit 
by the cruel light of those antique Jew-skinned lamps. 
Decades after Dachau fell, we stand in mist 
            that begins and ends with ash.
 

3. commonly asked questions

Why are we here? What have we come to see?
What do we need to find behind the doors?
Are we searching for an apology

from the ghosts of unrepentant Nazis?
We pay the entrance fee at the front door.
Why are we here? What have we come to see?

The actors have moved on to the next scene 
and set: furnace, shovel, and soot-stained door. 
Are we searching for an apology

from all the Germans who refused to see 
the ash falling in front of their locked doors? 
Why are we here? What have we come to see

that cannot be seen in other countries? 
Every country hides behind a white door. 
Are we searching for an apology

from the patient men who've hidden the keys? 
Listen: a door is a door is a door.
Why are we here? What have we come to see? 
Are we searching for an apology?

 

4. the american indian holocaust museum

What do we indigenous people want from our country?
We stand over mass graves. Our collective grief makes us numb. 
We are waiting for the construction of our museum.

We too could stack the shoes of our dead and fill a city 
to its thirteenth floor. What did you expect us to become? 
What do we indigenous people want from our country? 
We are waiting for the construction of our museum.

We are the great-grandchildren of Sand Creek and Wounded Knee. 
We are the veterans of the Indian wars. We are the sons 
and daughters of the walking dead. We have lost everyone. 
What do we indigenous people want from our country? 
We stand over mass graves. Our collective grief makes us numb. 
We are waiting for the construction of our museum.

 

5. songs from those who love the flames

We start the fires
on the church spire:
ash, ash.
We build tall pyres
from children's choirs:
ash, ash.
We watch flames gyre
and burn the liars:
ash, ash.

We watch flames gyre
from children's choirs:
ash, ash.
We start the fires
and burn the liars:
ash, ash.
We build tall pyres
on the church spire.
ash, ash.

We build tall pyres
and burn the liars:
ash, ash.
We watch flames gyre
on the church spire:
ash, ash.
We start the fires
from children's choirs:
ash, ash.

 

6. after we are free

If I were Jewish, how would I mourn the dead?
I am Spokane. I wake.

If I were Jewish, how would I remember the past?
I am Spokane. I page through the history books.

If I were Jewish, how would I find the joy to dance?
I am Spokane. I drop a quarter into the jukebox.

If I were Jewish, how would I find time to sing?
I am Spokane. I sit at the drum with all of my cousins.

If I were Jewish, how would I fall in love?
I am Spokane. I listen to an Indian woman whispering.

If I were Jewish, how would I feel about ash?
I am Spokane. I offer tobacco to all of my guests.

If I were Jewish, how would I tell the stories? 
I am Spokane. I rest my hands on the podium.

If I were Jewish, how would I sleep at night?
I am Spokane. I keep the television playing until dawn.

If I were Jewish, how would I find my home?
I am Spokane. I step into the river and close my eyes.

 

7. below freezing

Dachau was so cold I could see my breath 
so I was thankful for my overcoat.
I have nothing new to say about death

Each building sat at right angles to the rest. 
Around each corner, I expected ghosts.
Dachau was so cold I could see my breath.

Everything was clean, history compressed 
into shoes, photographs, private notes. 
I have nothing new to say about death.

I wanted to weep. I wanted to rest
my weary head as the ash mixed with snow. 
Dachau was so cold I could see my breath.

I am not a Jew. I was just a guest
in that theater which will never close. 
I have nothing new to say about death.

I wonder which people will light fires next
and which people will soon be turned to smoke. 
Dachau was so cold I could see my breath. 
I have nothing new to say about death.



I Would Steal Horses

For Kari 

for you, if there were any left,
give a dozen of the best
to your father, the auto mechanic
in the small town where you were born

and where he will die sometime by dark.
I am afraid of his hands, which have
rebuilt more of the small parts
of this world than I ever will.

I would sign treaties for you, take
every promise as the last lie, the last
point after which we both refuse the exact.

I would wrap us both in old blankets
hold every disease tight against our skin.



Little Big Man 

I got eyes, Jack, that can see 
an ant moving along the horizon
can pull four bottles shattering
down from the sky and recognize
the eyes of a blind man

who told me once, The future is yours
and I believed him until he left me
without a campfire, without an axe
to chop down a tree and build myself
a chair, house, cold drink.

Jack, how much pain is thre
in the world? I think there's only one kind
and we all keep moving around it in circles
like clumsy pioneers, over the same ground
until the landscape becomes so familiar
we settle down and call it home.

Seems like everybody wants to be an Indian.
Why should you be any different, Jack?
Still, when you rub the red dirt off your pale nose
your little insanities vanish.
Listen: the proof is glass.
When an Indian looks through a window
it's like a mirror. When the Indian looks
into a mirror, it's like a window.

I know you have dreams, Jack. We all want
an acre of land, love, and a full stomach.
Without that, we couldn't listen to the wind
without anger. But I've been sitting in a cold room
watching stars through a hole in the roof.
That bright star to the north doesn't have a name
I know. Like everything else, it will break my heart.
.

What the Orphan Inherits


Language

I dreamed I was digging your grave
with my bare hands.  I touched your face
and skin fell in thin strips to the ground

until only your tongue remained whole.
I hung it to smoke with the deer
for seven days.  It tasted thick and greasy

sinew gripped my tongue tight.  I rose
to walk naked through the fire. I spoke
English.  I was not consumed.


Names 
I do not have an Indian name.
The wind never spoke to my mother
when I was born.  My heart was hidden
beneath the shells of walnuts switched
back and forth.  I have to cheat to feel
the beating of drums in my chest.


Alcohol 
“For bringing us the horse
we could almost forgive you
for bringing us whisky.”


Time
Indian boys
Sinewy and doe-eyed
Frozen in headlights.

 

 

Poverty of Mirrors

You wake these mornings alone and nothing
can be forgiven; you drink the last
swallow of warm beer from the can
beside the bed, tell the stranger sleeping
on the floor to go home. It's too easy

to be no one with nothing to do, only
slightly worried about the light bill
more concerned with how dark day gets.

You walk alone on moist pavement wondering
what color rain is in the country.
Does the world out there revolve around rooms
without doors or windows? Centering the mirror
you found in the trash, walls seem closer
and you can never find the right way

out, so you open the fridge again
for a beer, find only rancid milk and drink it
whole. This all tastes too familiar.

 

Memorial Day, 1972

I was too young to clean graves
so I waded into the uranium river
carrying the cat who later gave birth
to six headless kittens.

O, Lord, remember, O, do remember me.

 

Water

I know a woman
who swims naked
in the ocean
no matter the season.

I don't have a reason
for telling you this (I never
witnessed her early morning
dips into the salt) other than
to let you know that I once found
the thought of her nudity erotic

but now can only imagine 
the incredible cold, how I would want
to cover her body with my coat
and tell her how crazy she is
for having so much faith
in two parts hydrogen, one part oxygen.

2.

While reading a mystery novel (I
don't remember the title), I

dropped a cup of hot tea
into my lap. Third degree burns

on my thighs, penis, and scrotum. I
still have the scars and once told

a white woman they were the result
of a highly sacred Spokane Indian adulthood ceremony.

3.

I knew a man
who drowned in three inches of water.

Rain collected
in a tire track.

His family and friends accuse me
of making light

of his death, but I insist
on my innocence. Lord, I think

his death is tragic, possibly epic
the first and last act

of a reservation opera, and I wish
I could use his name here, make him

remembered, but I am forbidden
from doing so by tribal laws

that are more important than any poem.
But I want to give him a name

that means what I say, and I so I name him
Hamlet, King Lear, Othello, Noah, Adam.

4.

Boo tells me, "Whenever I feel depressed or lonely
I drink a glass of water and immediately feel better."

5.

In the unlikely event of a water landing
you can use your seat cushion as a floatation device.

I worry about this.

I wonder if the puny cushion can possibly support
my weight. I am a large man. In the unlikely event
of a water landing, you can use your seat cushion
as a floatation device. Of course, we don't crash.
We land safely. We always land safely. And Ha! Ha!
the flight attendant tells the disembarking passengers
to drive safely away from the airport because driving is
so much more dangerous, statistically speaking, than flying.

I want to slap her across the mouth, statistically speaking.

In the unlikely event of a water landing, you can use
your seat cushion as a floatation device. I am suddenly afraid
of gravity so I take my seat cushion off the plane. I steal
the damn thing and run through the airport, chased
by an ever increasing number of security people, 
men and women, so I'm glad this airport has progressed
beyond an antiquated notion of gender roles. But wait, 

I have no time to be liberal, I have to run fast, so I do run fast
with that seat cushion pressed tightly against my chest.
I cannot run fast enough in such an awkward position
as I am a large man with large hands. I cannot easily hide.
I cannot blend into the crowd. I cannot duck behind
the counter of the Burger King and ask for your order, your order, your
order.

Oh, in the event of a water landing, you can use your seat cushion
as a floatation device, and here I am, running, and praying as I run,
every step shouting Lord, Lord, Lord, every other step whispering

amen, amen, amen.

6.

At the restaurant, I ask the waiter to leave the pitcher of water
because I drink lots of water.

I can't do that, he says.

Why not? I ask.

Because we never leave the pitcher, he says.

Not once? I ask.

Never, he says, have we ever left a whole pitcher of water, not once 
in the entire history of this restaurant. It is impossible for us to do so. 
It is inconceivable for us to even consider such a thing. Who knows
what would happen if we set such a precedent?

7.

When I was seven, I took swim lessons at the YMCA
from three beautiful teenagers who all seemed like women to me.

They hugged me when they saw me waiting in line
to see JAWS at the Fox Theater in downtown Spokane.

Where are those girls now? Somewhere, they are being women.

Do they remember teaching me how to swim? Do they
recognize my face when they pick up the local newspaper
or see my photograph on the back of my latest book?

Oh, strange, strange ego.

Here, I've decided I want them to love me from afar. I want them
to regret their whole lives because they were once sixteen years old
swimmers who never stopped to passionately kiss
the seven year old me, as I floated
from the deep end of the pool back to the shallow.

8.

My brother, the big one, says, "It ain't water
unless it's got some Kool-aid in it."

9.

My wife, the Hidatsa Indian, grew up in Southern California
with a swimming pool. Wow!

Her father, the trickster, called relatives back home
in North Dakota. Called them in late December
when trees were exploding in the high plains cold. 
Called them and said, He held the phone up to the air, toward
the empty pool, because it was too cold to swim in December, even
in Southern California, but the North Dakota Indians didn't know
any better, so they were jealous and happy at the same time.

My wife, just a child then of five or ten or eighteen years old,
heard the slurred laughter of her father, the drunk, and
maybe he would laugh and get off the phone and be charming
or maybe he would be the cruel bastard, but there was no way
of knowing until he got off the phone, so she'd sit in her room
with a glass of water on the windowsill, oh, she'd be praying
to that glass of water, oh, she'd be praying
like everything was two parts broken heart and one part hope.

 

Why Indian Men Fall in Love With White Women

"This is how it is," says the white woman in the donut shop (it wasn't
a donut shop but something else entirely) and then she laughs
a melodious, joyous noise, and she smacks a hand, her left one
I believe, to her forehead in mock-Lucy exasperation, and then says
again, "This is how it is," but then adds as an afterthought, or

considering the use of the pun, perhaps had planned on saying it
all along, saying, "This is my job," except she doesn't say job, as
in work, she says Job, with a long vowel, as in the guy from the Bible.
Of course, this makes me love her, because if she said it
as an afterthought, then she is bright, but if she had always planned

to say it, to say Job, like the Job in the Bible, who had the worst job
in human history, then she is disciplined. She sais "This is my Job,"
as an afterthought, or as part of her daily script, I don't care which.
She says Job with the job, the job belonging to Job, Job possessed
by his job, the Job, the job, the Job, the job. Is the white woman

in the donut shop really that clever, and let's admit it, the pun
is not truly that clever, but clever enough, perhaps too clever
for a woman working in a donut shop (but it wasn't really
a donut shop), but I don't really care to guess at the exact level
of her education, because she laughs so joyously, because her eyes

are blue and alive with happiness and intelligence, so I decide
right there in the donut shop, that she is indeed too clever to be
working in a donut shop, that she is, in fact, a scholar who turned
her back on her academic pursuits, that she was a theologian
a blessed and gifted woman who wanted to be a priest, a Jesuit

an Ignation, of all things, but was turned back by the Catholic Church
and its antiquated notions of gender. She is romantic and novel
and more than a little sad, but she disguises her sadness so well
behind her blue eyes, though I am sensitive enough to see enough
of her sadness to guess at the whole of her sadness, even as she laughs

even as she takes my sympathetic order for a dozen donuts, as she gathers
the donuts into the appropriate container, as she hands it to me, as
our hands touch, as the tips of her fingers brush against the tips
of my fingers, as we briefly share a moment, and by "moment," I mean
a segment of immeasurable time, and in that moment, I feel forgiven

or perhaps I am merely aroused sexually and/or spiritually, but
in either case, I take a donut (maple?) from my appropriate container
and offer it to her, and she takes it with delight (she still loves
donuts, despite the Job-ness of her job), and she bites into it
and chews it without suggestion. She chews simply

with and without grace. She chews like a monk. She is that flour;
she is that egg; she is that sugar; she is that water. She is that flour;
she is that egg; she is that sugar; she is that water; She is the whole
of the donut; she is the hole of the donuts. She is the blue tear
balanced on the lower lid of her left eye. She is Job, my dear Job.

 

Owl Dancing with Fred Astaire

During a traditional Native American owl dance, the woman asks the man to dance. He is not supposed to refuse. However, if he does refuse, he must pay the woman whatever she wants and then tell the entire crowd at the powwow exactly why he refused.

 

I. 

I met the Indian woman who asked Fred Astaire to dance.
He politely refused her offer. “He was so charming,” she said, “even when he rejected me.
But I kept wishing it was an owl dance.”

II.

An owl dance is simple: two steps with your left foot forward,
one step with your right foot back, all to the beat of a drum currently being pounded by six Indian men in baseball hats.
They sing falsetto. Many non-Indians wonder what they are singing but that is too complicated to explain here. Let’s just say
they are singing an owl dance song. It is not necessarily romantic. I mean, sisters owl dance with brothers
and sons owl dance with their mothers. Yet, at every powwow, there are beautiful Indian women
who owl dance with beautiful Indian men, all hoping for love/sex/a brief vacation from loneliness.
I must emphasize, however, that our love lives are not simple.There are Indian men who have never been asked to owl dance.
Alone in the powwow crowd, those men tap their feet lightly along with the drums. They sing softly under their breath.
Perhaps they secretly wish they were Fred Astaire.

III.

Fred Astaire is gone now.
He is dead.
He will not be coming back.
However, if you watch his movies
you will notice
that he often smiles. What was he thinking?
Was he merely pleased with himself
for being Fred Astaire or was he completely unaware
of the camera and crew?
Was he dancing simply for the love of dancing? I don’t know
and you will never know either.
Only Fred Astaire knew and he was very good at keeping a secret
or so I am told
by the people who helped keep his secrets.

IV.

In my dream, Fred Astaire stumbles (yes, stumbles)
into the powwow and is shocked by the number of Indians who have survived
the smallpox blankets, U.S. Cavalry, relocation, etc. He smiles because, well, he is a good man prone to smiling.
(I must emphasize, however, that there are also bad men who are prone to smiling.) Fred Astaire loves the drums.
He is pleasantly surprised by the quality of the singing. Such pitch! and timbre! and range! and projection!
Fred Astaire taps his foot. He is wearing a tuxedo. He is the skinniest white man in the history of the world.
Can you see him? He is not all that handsome but he looks like a dancer. A great dancer.
In all cultures, women will choose a homely great dancer over a handsome non-dancer. Fred Astaire is confident.
He waits for the next owl dance to begin.

V.

Ask yourself this: How many times in your life
are you going to be asked to dance? Take that number and divide it by the number of men and/or women
who have expressed deep affection for you. If that number is X, then Y = heartbreak + X.
And, or course, Y is always equal to Fred Astaire.

 

At Navajo Monument Valley Tribal School

from the photograph
by Skeet McAuley 
the football field rises 
to meet the mesa. Indian boys 
gallop across the grass, against

the beginnings of their body. 
On those Saturday afternoons, 
unbroken horses gather to watch

their sons growing larger 
in the small parts of the world.
Everyone is the quarterback.

There is no thin man in a big hat 
writing down all the names 
in two columns: winners and losers.

This is the eternal football game, 
Indians versus Indians. All the Skins 
in the wooden bleachers fancydancing,

stomping red dust straight down 
into nothing. Before the game is over, 
the eighth-grade girls' track team

comes running, circling the field, 
their thin and brown legs echoing 
wild horses, wild horses, wild horses.

 

The Farm

1. Jonah
All of us, the Indians, know exactly where we were
when scientists announced that they had found the cure

for cancer. I was eating lunch in the Tribal Cafe
for the third time that week and was only halfway

through my fry bread when the national news broke
into the local news: a white man in a lab coat

stood at a podium porcupined with microphones
and quietly spoke. "We have found that the bone

marrow of Indians, synthesized with a few trace
elements, form a powerful antiviral agent named

Steptoe 123. This agent, when taken orally, will
stop the metastatic growth of tumors and kill

cancer cells. Steptoe 123 has been 95% effective
in ten years of research under the direction

of Dr. Miles Steptoe at the Center for Disease
Control. We have prepared a detailed press release

which will give you more information on Steptoe
123, Dr. Steptoe, and all that you need to know

at this time. The President, with a clear vision
of the future of Steptoe 123, has made a decision.

Therefore, under the authority of Executive Order
1492, we have closed all of the reservation borders

within the United States and will keep them closed
to any and all unauthorized traffic until further notice."

Silence. Then I turned to Charlie the Cook, who was really
the dishwater. "Jonah," he asked me. "Is it real?"

"It's real," I said. Charlie looked at me, looked|
at Agnes the Waitress, who was really the cook.

"Why is it real?" asked Charlie, but it was too late
for a history lesson. We all needed to escape

before the borders were completely shut down.
"We've got to go," I said. "We've got to go now."

So Agnes, Charlie, and I jumped into my old car
and prayed it would save us like that famous ark

but we didn't even make it past
Cold Springs before we heard the first dissonant

music: the helicopters played ragtime as they fell
from Heaven, as one descended on us with propeller
I drove the car off the road and into a field

where everything stopped
as Sam the Indian, who

was really white, suddenly stepped onto the road
with his hands out, palms open, just inches below

that helicopter, as Charlie asked, "Where did he
come from?" I just remember Sam was whittled

to bone as he helicopter dropped down onto him.
(Did you know you can play a gospel hymn

on a flute carved from human bone? I heard
the hymn once, in a dream, but have since learned

to play it on a hollow femur.) The soldiers came
for us then, dragged us from the car, asked for our names

and tribal affiliations, demanded to know if the guy
killed under the helicopter was Indian or white.

"He was white," I said. "Fully white?" a soldier asked
and I told him that Sam the Indian might be the last

fully good white man in America. "The dead guy ain't Feeder
or Breeder," shouted the soldier. Sam wasn't needed

because the scientists couldn't use his bone marrow
so the soldiers left Sam's body to the crows and sparrows.

"What am I?" I asked the soldier as he tied my hands behind
my back with soft cotton twine, but he did not reply.

"What am I?" I asked the soldier as they carried
me to the helicopter. "Are you single or married?"

asked a soldier. "I'm a bag of bones," I said.
"Do you have any children," the soldier asked again

and again, but I kept telling him I was all alone
in this new world, that I was just a bag of bones.



2. Sam the Indian
When the blades fell upon me
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When the blades fell upon me
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When the blades fell upon me
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When the blades fell upon me
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When the blades fell upon me
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When the blades fell upon me
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When the blades fell upon me
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.



3. Charlie the Cook
After we were captured by the soldiers, they took all of the Indians to a place called the Farm. My history became their history. They took notes. They tattooed my forehead with a B for Breeder, because I was young and pure-blood. They keep the Breeder men and women together. In each cell, there are five women and one man. We are rotated often, never allowed to develop relationships. We are not allowed to talk. We are never in the same cell with a member of the same tribe. Bright lights wake us at 6 A.M. We eat breakfast only after we procreate. I'm supposed to have sex with five Indian women a day. I have fathered dozens of children since this all started. Half of my children became Breeders and stayed at the Farm, while the other half became Feeders and were sent to the Kitchen. The Feeders have it much worse than the Breeders. The Feeders have their marrow taken from them. They are hooked up to machines that suck it out. Sometimes they survive. Sometimes they die. It happens to children, too. There is no age limit. When they need the marrow, they take it. There's constant demand. Each cancer patient needs a year's worth of Steptoe 123. Late at night, in the cell, I reach my hand out into the dark and I feel another hand reaching out for mine. I cannot see who I touch. We cannot speak. But we hold each other's hands lightly, ready to release our grips at any moment.



4. Agnes the Waitress
When the Indian men come to me
I try to smile.

I lift my tunic
and part my legs

with as much honor
as I can manage.

I try to love the Indian men
who are forced to enter me.

It would be easy to hate them.
Some women do.

Some women refuse
to acknowledge the man's body.

Some women close their eyes 
and imagine a new childhood.

Some women weep constantly.
They don't last long.

But I hold the men close
and kiss their necks.

That always surprises them.
They stare at me

and I wonder if 
I am beautiful.

I have forgotten
what that means.

I cannot tell the difference
between a beautiful man

and an ugly man
because it makes no difference.

We do not have the luxury
of such a decision.

We are Indian
and that is all that matters

though it is rumored
that white guards sneak

into bed with Indian women.
I have heard the rustling

of blankets late at night
when Indian women crawled

into bed with Indian women.
An Indian woman once kissed me

and I felt her hands on my breasts.
I reached for her, too

but the guard rushed in
and took her away.

I never saw her again.
I dream about her

though I cannot tell you
if she was beautiful.

I want to believe
my babies are beautiful

though I have learned to let them go.
I give birth.

I heal.
I am pregnant again.

Pregnancy is the good time.
Pregnant women share a cell.

We eat well.
We are not touched.

We are allowed to speak
to the body inside our own

and pretend it is our mother,
father, sister, and brother.



5. Charlie the Cook
We have developed a highly complex and subtle sign language. Through slight gestures, such as brushing the hair from our faces, we can talk about the past. The volume of a cough can change the tense of a sentence. A woman can sit up in bed, scratch her cheek, stand quickly, shuffle across the room to a water fountain, take a big drink, swallow loudly, and we'd all know she was telling a joke. Indians always find a way to laugh, though each of us laugh in a different way. I laugh by crossing my arms. I cry by tapping my left foot against the floor.



6. Agnes the Waitress
I try to find the soldiers beneath their masks.
I try to find the doctors behind their sorrow.

The white people never thought to ask
if we would voluntarily donate the marrow.



7. Jonah
We've been planning the revolution for years.
We have weapons and white friends, but I fear

Indians have forgotten how to survive.
It's a complicated song and dance. Late at night

we practice. We pound invisible drums. We sing
with our mouths closed. Silence is the thing

we must learn to fear. This is the plan.
One night, we will slip from our beds and stand

together. We will stamp our feet in unison
and sing the same song loudly with strong lungs

and hearts. We will sing the old songs.
Cousins, this is not where we belong.

Way, ya, hi, yo. Way, ya, hi, yo.< 
Way, ya, hi, yo. Way, ya, hi, yo.

Cousins, remember how we sang and danced back then.
During the revolution, we will find our music again.



8. Sam the Indian

When I fell into Heaven
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When I fell into Heaven
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When I fell into Heaven
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When I fell into Heaven
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When I fell into Heaven
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When I fell into Heaven
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When I fell into Heaven
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.
When I fell into Heaven
I was closer to being Indian than I had ever been before.



9. Charlie the Cook
I have not seen a black man in years. Not a black woman. Not a Mexican man, though their blood is often mixed with Indians, too. I have not seen another Indian man. I have seen only white men and Indian women. There are rumors. The Indian women have refused to procreate, and instead, they are killing the Indian men. It would be easy. In each cell, five women to each man. There are rumors. Indian men are becoming sterile. We have fathered too many children. There are rumors. The revolution is about to begin. Indians will rise against our jailers. We will never touch each other again. We will allow ourselves to die as a people, rather than live as we do now. There are rumors. A large army of sympathetic outsiders, white, black, brown, and yellow, are preparing to storm the Farm. They will free us. There are rumors. All of the cancer is gone. It has been completely destroyed. Our jailers will soon open the doors and let us free. They will give us medals of honor as we leave.

 

 

Defending Walt Whitman

Basketball is like this for young Indian boys, all arms and legs
and serious stomach muscles. Every body is brown!
These are the twentieth-century warriors who will never kill,
although a few sat quietly in the deserts of Kuwait,
waiting for orders to do something, to do something.

God, there is nothing as beautiful as a jumpshot
on a reservation summer basketball court
where the ball is moist with sweat,
and makes a sound when it swishes through the net
that causes Walt Whitman to weep because it is so perfect.

There are veterans of foreign wars here
although their bodies are still dominated
by collarbones and knees, although their bodies still respond
in the ways that bodies are supposed to respond when we are young.
Every body is brown! Look there, that boy can run
up and down this court forever. He can leap for a rebound
with his back arched like a salmon, all meat and bone
synchronized, magnetic, as if the court were a river,
as if the rim were a dam, as if the air were a ladder
leading the Indian boy toward home.

Some of the Indian boys still wear their military hair cuts
while a few have let their hair grow back.
It will never be the same as it was before!
One Indian boy has never cut his hair, not once, and he braids it
into wild patterns that do not measure anything.
He is just a boy with too much time on his hands.
Look at him. He wants to play this game in bare feet.

God, the sun is so bright! There is no place like this.
Walt Whitman stretches his calf muscles
on the sidelines. He has the next game.
His huge beard is ridiculous on the reservation.
Some body throws a crazy pass and Walt Whitman catches it
with quick hands. He brings the ball close to his nose
and breathes in all of its smells: leather, brown skin, sweat,
black hair, burning oil, twisted ankle, long drink of warm water,
gunpowder, pine tree. Walt Whitman squeezes the ball tightly.
He wants to run. He hardly has the patience to wait for his turn.
"What's the score?" he asks. He asks, "What's the score?"

Basketball is like this for Walt Whitman. He watches these Indian boys
as if they were the last bodies on earth. Every body is brown!
Walt Whitman shakes because he believes in God.
Walt Whitman dreams of the Indian boy who will defend him,
trapping him in the corner, all flailing arms and legs
and legendary stomach muscles. Walt Whitman shakes
because he believes in God. Walt Whitman dreams
of the first jumpshot he will take, the ball arcing clumsily
from his fingers, striking the rim so hard that it sparks.
Walt Whitman shakes because he believes in God.
Walt Whitman closes his eyes. He is a small man and his beard
is ludicrous on the reservation, absolutely insane.
His beard makes the Indian boys righteously laugh. His beard
frightens the smallest Indian boys. His beard tickles the skin
of the Indian boys who dribble past him. His beard, his beard!

God, there is beauty in every body. Walt Whitman stands
at center court while the Indian boys run from basket to basket.
Walt Whitman cannot tell the difference between
offense and defense. He does not care if he touches the ball.
Half of the Indian boys wear t-shirts damp with sweat
and the other half are bareback, skin slick and shiny.
There is no place like this. Walt Whitman smiles.
Walt Whitman shakes. This game belongs to him.

 

 
The Powwow at the End of the World


I am told by many of you that I must forgive and so I shall
after an Indian woman puts her shoulder to the Grand Coulee Dam
and topples it. I am told by many of you that I must forgive
and so I shall after the floodwaters burst each successive dam
downriver from the Grand Coulee. I am told by many of you
that I must forgive and so I shall after the floodwaters find
their way to the mouth of the Columbia River as it enters the Pacific
and causes all of it to rise. I am told by many of you that I must forgive
and so I shall after the first drop of floodwater is swallowed by that salmon
waiting in the Pacific. I am told by many of you that I must forgive and so I shall
after that salmon swims upstream, through the mouth of the Columbia
and then past the flooded cities, broken dams and abandoned reactors
of Hanford. I am told by many of you that I must forgive and so I shall
after that salmon swims through the mouth of the Spokane River
as it meets the Columbia, then upstream, until it arrives
in the shallows of a secret bay on the reservation where I wait alone.
I am told by many of you that I must forgive and so I shall after
that salmon leaps into the night air above the water, throws
a lightning bolt at the brush near my feet, and starts the fire
which will lead all of the lost Indians home. I am told
by many of you that I must forgive and so I shall
after we Indians have gathered around the fire with that salmon
who has three stories it must tell before sunrise: one story will teach us
how to pray; another story will make us laugh for hours;
the third story will give us reason to dance. I am told by many
of you that I must forgive and so I shall when I am dancing
with my tribe during the powwow at the end of the world.
Essays

Superman and Me 

I learned to read with a Superman comic book. Simple enough, I suppose. I cannot recall which particular Superman comic book I read, nor can I remember which villain he fought in that issue. I cannot remember the plot, nor the means by which I obtained the comic book. What I can remember is this: I was 3 years old, a Spokane Indian boy living with his family on the Spokane Indian Reservation in eastern Washington state. We were poor by most standards, but one of my parents usually managed to find some minimum-wage job or another, which made us middle-class by reservation standards. I had a brother and three sisters. We lived on a combination of irregular paychecks, hope, fear and government surplus food.

My father, who is one of the few Indians who went to Catholic school on purpose, was an avid reader of westerns, spy thrillers, murder mysteries, gangster epics, basketball player biographies and anything else he could find. He bought his books by the pound at Dutch's Pawn Shop, Goodwill, Salvation Army and Value Village. When he had extra money, he bought new novels at supermarkets, convenience stores and hospital gift shops. Our house was filled with books. They were stacked in crazy piles in the bathroom, bedrooms and living room. In a fit of unemployment-inspired creative energy, my father built a set of bookshelves and soon filled them with a random assortment of books about the Kennedy assassination, Watergate, the Vietnam War and the entire 23-book series of the Apache westerns. My father loved books, and since I loved my father with an aching devotion, I decided to love books as well.

I can remember picking up my father's books before I could read. The words themselves were mostly foreign, but I still remember the exact moment when I first understood, with a sudden clarity, the purpose of a paragraph. I didn't have the vocabulary to say "paragraph," but I realized that a paragraph was a fence that held words. The words inside a paragraph worked together for a common purpose. They had some specific reason for being inside the same fence. This knowledge delighted me. I began to think of everything in terms of paragraphs. Our reservation was a small paragraph within the United States. My family's house was a paragraph, distinct from the other paragraphs of the LeBrets to the north, the Fords to our south and the Tribal School to the west. Inside our house, each family member existed as a separate paragraph but still had genetics and common experiences to link us. Now, using this logic, I can see my changed family as an essay of seven paragraphs: mother, father, older brother, the deceased sister, my younger twin sisters and our adopted little brother.

At the same time I was seeing the world in paragraphs, I also picked up that Superman comic book. Each panel, complete with picture, dialogue and narrative was a three-dimensional paragraph. In one panel, Superman breaks through a door. His suit is red, blue and yellow. The brown door shatters into many pieces. I look at the narrative above the picture. I cannot read the words, but I assume it tells me that "Superman is breaking down the door." Aloud, I pretend to read the words and say, "Superman is breaking down the door." Words, dialogue, also float out of Superman's mouth. Because he is breaking down the door, I assume he says, "I am breaking down the door." Once again, I pretend to read the words and say aloud, "I am breaking down the door" In this way, I learned to read.

This might be an interesting story all by itself. A little Indian boy teaches himself to read at an early age and advances quickly. He reads "Grapes of Wrath" in kindergarten when other children are struggling through "Dick and Jane." If he'd been anything but an Indian boy living on the reservation, he might have been called a prodigy. But he is an Indian boy living on the reservation and is simply an oddity. He grows into a man who often speaks of his childhood in the third-person, as if it will somehow dull the pain and make him sound more modest about his talents.


A smart Indian is a dangerous person, widely feared and ridiculed by Indians and non-Indians alike. I fought with my classmates on a daily basis. They wanted me to stay quiet when the non-Indian teacher asked for answers, for volunteers, for help. We were Indian children who were expected to be stupid. Most lived up to those expectations inside the classroom but subverted them on the outside. They struggled with basic reading in school but could remember how to sing a few dozen powwow songs. They were monosyllabic in front of their non-Indian teachers but could tell complicated stories and jokes at the dinner table. They submissively ducked their heads when confronted by a non-Indian adult but would slug it out with the Indian bully who was 10 years older. As Indian children, we were expected to fail in the non-Indian world. Those who failed were ceremonially accepted by other Indians and appropriately pitied by non-Indians.

I refused to fail. I was smart. I was arrogant. I was lucky. I read books late into the night, until I could barely keep my eyes open. I read books at recess, then during lunch, and in the few minutes left after I had finished my classroom assignments. I read books in the car when my family traveled to powwows or basketball games. In shopping malls, I ran to the bookstores and read bits and pieces of as many books as I could. I read the books my father brought home from the pawnshops and secondhand. I read the books I borrowed from the library. I read the backs of cereal boxes. I read the newspaper. I read the bulletins posted on the walls of the school, the clinic, the tribal offices, the post office. I read junk mail. I read auto-repair manuals. I read magazines. I read anything that had words and paragraphs. I read with equal parts joy and desperation. I loved those books, but I also knew that love had only one purpose. I was trying to save my life.

Despite all the books I read, I am still surprised I became a writer. I was going to be a pediatrician. These days, I write novels, short stories, and poems. I visit schools and teach creative writing to Indian kids. In all my years in the reservation school system, I was never taught how to write poetry, short stories or novels. I was certainly never taught that Indians wrote poetry, short stories and novels. Writing was something beyond Indians. I cannot recall a single time that a guest teacher visited the reservation. There must have been visiting teachers. Who were they? Where are they now? Do they exist? I visit the schools as often as possible. The Indian kids crowd the classroom. Many are writing their own poems, short stories and novels. They have read my books. They have read many other books. They look at me with bright eyes and arrogant wonder. They are trying to save their lives. Then there are the sullen and already defeated Indian kids who sit in the back rows and ignore me with theatrical precision. The pages of their notebooks are empty. They carry neither pencil nor pen. They stare out the window. They refuse and resist. "Books," I say to them. "Books," I say. I throw my weight against their locked doors. The door holds. I am smart. I am arrogant. I am lucky. I am trying to save our lives.
 

 

I Hated Tonto (Still Do) 

I was a little Spokane Indian boy who read every book and saw every movie about Indians, no matter how terrible. I'd read those historical romance novels about the stereotypical Indian warrior ravaging the virginal white schoolteacher.

I can still see the cover art.

The handsome, blue-eyed warrior (the Indians in romance novels are always blue-eyed because half-breeds are somehow sexier than full-blooded Indians) would be nuzzling (the Indians in romance novels are always performing acts that are described in animalistic terms) the impossibly pale neck of a white woman as she reared her head back in primitive ecstasy (the Indians in romance novels always inspire white women to commit acts of primitive ecstasy).

Of course, after reading such novels, I imagined myself to be a blue-eyed warrior nuzzling the necks of various random, primitive and ecstatic white women.

And I just as often imagined myself to be a cinematic Indian, splattered with Day-Glo Hollywood war paint as I rode off into yet another battle against the latest actor to portray Gen. George Armstrong Custer.

But I never, not once, imagined myself to be Tonto.

I hated Tonto then and I hate him now.

However, despite my hatred of Tonto, I loved movies about Indians, loved them beyond all reasoning and saw no fault with any of them.

I loved John Ford's "The Searchers."

I rooted for John Wayne as he searched for his niece for years and years. I rooted for John Wayne even though I knew he was going to kill his niece because she had been "soiled" by the Indians. Hell, I rooted for John Wayne because I understood why he wanted to kill his niece.

I hated those savage Indians just as much as John Wayne did.



In the movies, Indians are always accompanied by ominous music. And I've seen so many Indian movies that I feel like I'm constantly accompanied by ominous music. I always feel that something bad is about to happen.

I am always aware of how my whole life is shaped by my hatred of Tonto. Whenever I think of Tonto, I hear ominous music.

I walk into shopping malls or family restaurants, as the ominous music drops a few octaves, and imagine that I am Billy Jack, the half-breed Indian and Vietnam vet turned flower-power pacifist (now there's a combination) who loses his temper now and again, takes off his shoes (while his opponents patiently wait for him to do so), and then kicks the red out of the necks of a few dozen racist white extras.

You have to remember Billy Jack, right?

Every Indian remembers Billy Jack. I mean, back in the day, Indians worshipped Billy Jack.

Whenever a new Billy Jack movie opened in Spokane, my entire tribe would climb into two or three vans like so many circus clowns and drive to the East Trent Drive-In for a long evening of greasy popcorn, flat soda pop, fossilized licorice rope and interracial violence.

We Indians cheered as Billy Jack fought for us, for every single Indian.

Of course, we conveniently ignored the fact that Tom Laughlin, the actor who played Billy Jack, was definitely not Indian.

After all, such luminary white actors as Charles Bronson, Chuck Connors, Burt Reynolds, Burt Lancaster, Sal Mineo, Anthony Quinn and Charlton Heston had already portrayed Indians, so who were we to argue?

I mean, Tom Laughlin did have a nice tan and he spoke in monosyllables and wore cowboy boots and a jean jacket just like Indians. And he did have a Cherokee grandmother or grandfather or butcher, so he was Indian by proximity, and that was good enough in 1972, when disco music was about to rear its ugly head and bell-bottom pants were just beginning to change the shape of our legs.

When it came to the movies, Indians had learned to be happy with less.

We didn't mind that cinematic Indians never had jobs.

We didn't mind that cinematic Indians were deadly serious.

We didn't mind that cinematic Indians were rarely played by Indian actors.

We made up excuses.

"Well, that Tom Laughlin may not be Indian, but he sure should be."

"Well, that movie wasn't so good, but Sal Mineo looked sort of like Uncle Stubby when he was still living out on the reservation."

"Well, I hear Burt Reynolds is a little bit Cherokee. Look at his cheekbones. He's got them Indian cheekbones."

"Well, it's better than nothing."

Yes, that became our battle cry.

"Sometimes, it's a good day to die. Sometimes, it's better than nothing."

We Indians became so numb to the possibility of dissent, so accepting of our own lowered expectations, that we canonized a film like "Powwow Highway."

When it was first released, I loved "Powwow Highway." I cried when I first saw it in the theater, then cried again when I stayed and watched it again a second time.

I mean, I loved that movie. I memorized whole passages of dialogue. But recently, I watched the film for the first time in many years and cringed in shame and embarrassment with every stereotypical scene.

I cringed when Philbert Bono climbed to the top of a sacred mountain and left a Hershey chocolate bar as an offering.

I cringed when Philbert and Buddy Red Bow waded into a stream and sang Indian songs to the moon.

I cringed when Buddy had a vision of himself as an Indian warrior throwing a tomahawk through the window of a police cruiser.

I mean, I don't know a single Indian who would leave a chocolate bar as an offering. I don't know any Indians who have ever climbed to the top of any mountain. I don't know any Indians who wade into streams and sing to the moon. I don't know of any Indians who imagine themselves to be Indian warriors.
Wait—

I was wrong. I know of at least one Indian boy who always imagined himself to be a cinematic Indian warrior.

Me.

I watched the movies and saw the kind of Indian I was supposed to be.

A cinematic Indian is supposed to climb mountains.

I am afraid of heights.

A cinematic Indian is supposed to wade into streams and sing songs.

I don't know how to swim.

A cinematic Indian is supposed to be a warrior.

I haven't been in a fistfight since sixth grade and she beat the crap out of me.

I mean, I knew I could never be as brave, as strong, as wiser as visionary, as white as the Indians in the movies.

I was just one little Indian boy who hated Tonto because Tonto was the only cinematic Indian who looked like me.




 

Ellen West 

I love sweets,—
                              heaven
would be dying on a bed of vanilla ice cream . . .
 
But my true self
is thin, all profile
 
and effortless gestures, the sort of blond
elegant girl whose
                                body is the image of her soul.
 
—My doctors tell me I must give up
this ideal;
                 but I
WILL NOT . . . cannot.
 
Only to my husband I'm not simply a "case."
 
But he is a fool. He married
meat, and thought it was a wife.
 
* * *
 
Why am I a girl?
 
I ask my doctors, and they tell me they
don't know, that it is just "given."
 
But it has such
implications—;
                            and sometimes,
I even feel like a girl.
 
* * *
 
Now, at the beginning of Ellen's thirty-second year, her
physical condition has deteriorated still further. Her use
of laxatives increases beyond measure. Every evening she
takes sixty to seventy tablets of a laxative, with the result
that she suffers tortured vomiting at night and violent
diarrhea by day, often accompanied by a weakness of the
heart. She has thinned down to a skeleton, and weighs
only 92 pounds.
 
* * *
 
About five years ago, I was in a restaurant,
eating alone
                           with a book. I was
not married, and often did that . . .
 
—I'd turn down
dinner invitations, so I could eat alone;
 
I'd allow myself two pieces of bread, with
butter, at the beginning, and three scoops of
vanilla ice cream, at the end,—
 
                                                     sitting there alone
 
with a book, both in the book
and out of it, waited on, idly
watching people,—
 
                                    when an attractive young man
and woman, both elegantly dressed,
sat next to me.
 
                            She was beautiful—;
 
with sharp, clear features, a good
bone structure—;
                               if she took her make-up off
in front of you, rubbing cold cream
again and again across her skin, she still would be
beautiful—
                   more beautiful.
 
And he,—
                   I couldn't remember when I had seen a man
so attractive. I didn't know why. He was almost
 
a male version
                             of her,—
 
I had the sudden, mad notion that I
wanted to be his lover . . .
 
—Were they married?
                                      were they lovers?
 
They didn't wear wedding rings.
 
Their behavior was circumspect. They discussed
politics. They didn't touch . . .
 
—How could I discover?
 
                                                Then, when the first course
arrived, I noticed the way
 
each held his fork out for the other
 
to taste what he had ordered . . .
 
                                                                 They did this
again and again, with pleased looks, indulgent
smiles, for each course,
                                     more than once for each dish—;
much too much for just friends . . .
 
—Their behavior somehow sickened me;
 
the way each gladly
put the food the other had offered into his mouth—;
 
I knew what they were. I knew they slept together.
 
An immense depression came over me . . .
 
—I knew I could never
with such ease allow another to put food into my mouth:
 
happily myself put food into another's mouth—;
 
I knew that to become a wife I would have to give up my ideal.
 
* * *
 
Even as a child,
I saw that the "natural" process of aging
 
is for one's middle to thicken—
one's skin to blotch;
 
as happened to my mother.
And her mother.
                            I loathed "Nature."
 
At twelve, pancakes
became the most terrible thought there is. . .
 
I shall defeat "Nature."
 
In the hospital, when they
weigh me, I wear weights secretly sewn into my belt.
 
* * *
 
January 16. The patient is allowed to eat in her room, but comes
readily with her husband to afternoon coffee. Previously she had
stoutly resisted this on the ground that she did not really eat but
devoured like a wild animal. This she demonstrated with utmost
realism . . . . Her physical examination showed nothing striking.
Salivary-glands are markedly enlarged on both sides.
January 21. Has been reading Faust again. In her diary,
writes that art is the "mutual permeation" of the "world of the
body" and the "world of the spirit." Says that her own poems
are "hospital poems . . . weak—without skill or perseverance;
only managing to beat their wings softly."
February 8. Agitation, quickly subsided again. Has
attached herself to an elegant, very thin female patient. Homo-
erotic component strikingly evident.
February 15. Vexation, and torment. Says that her mind
forces her always to think of eating. Feels herself degraded by
this. Has entirely, for the first time in years, stopped writing poetry.
 
* * *
 
Callas is my favorite singer, but I've only
seen her once—;
 
I've never forgotten that night. . .
 
—It was in Tosca, she had long before
lost weight, her voice
had been, for years,
                                  deteriorating, half itself. . .
 
When her career began, of course, she was fat,
 
enormous—; in the early photographs,
sometimes I almost don't recognize her. . .
 
The voice too then was enormous—
 
healthy; robust; subtle; but capable of
crude effects, even vulgar,
                                             almost out of
high spirits, too much health. . .
 
But soon she felt that she must lose weight,—
that all she was trying to express
 
was obliterated by her body,
buried in flesh—;
                               abruptly, within
four months, she lost at least sixty pounds. . .
 
—The gossip in Milan was that Callas
had swallowed a tapeworm.
 
But of course she hadn't.
 
                                            The tapeworm
was her soul. . .
 
—How her soul, uncompromising,
insatiable,
                    must have loved eating the flesh from her bones,
 
revealing this extraordinarily
mercurial; fragile; masterly creature. . .
 
—But irresistibly, nothing
stopped there; the huge voice
 
also began to change: at first, it simply diminished
in volume, in size,
                                  then the top notes became
shrill, unreliable—at last,
usually not there at all. . .
 
—No one knows why. Perhaps her mind,
ravenous, still insatiable, sensed
 
that to struggle with the shreds of a voice
 
must make her artistry subtler, more refined,
more capable of expressing humiliation,
rage, betrayal. . .
 
—Perhaps the opposite. Perhaps her spirit
loathed the unending struggle
 
to embody itself, to manifest itself, on a stage whose
 
mechanics, and suffocating customs,
seemed expressly designed to annihilate spirit. . .
 
—I know that in Tosca, in the second act,
when, humiliated, hounded by Scarpia,
she sang Vissi d'arte
                                      —"I lived for art"—
 
and in torment, bewilderment, at the end she asks,
with a voice reaching
                                      harrowingly for the notes,
 
"Art has repaid me LIKE THIS?"
 
                                                           I felt I was watching
autobiography—
                              an art; skill;
virtuosity
 
miles distant from the usual soprano's
athleticism,—
                         the usual musician's dream
of virtuosity without content. . .
 
—I wonder what she feels, now,
listening to her recordings.
 
For they have already, within a few years,
begun to date. . .
 
Whatever they express
they express through the style of a decade
and a half—;
                         a style she helped create. . .
 
—She must know that now
she probably would not do a trill in
exactly that way,—
                                   that the whole sound, atmosphere,
dramaturgy of her recordings
 
have just slightly become those of the past. . .
 
—Is it bitter? Does her soul
tell her
 
that she was an idiot ever to think
anything
                material wholly could satisfy?. . .
 
—Perhaps it says: The only way
to escape
the History of Styles
 
is not to have a body.
 
* * *
 
When I open my eyes in the morning, my great
mystery
             stands before me . . .
 
—I know that I am intelligent; therefore
 
the inability not to fear food
day-and-night; this unending hunger
ten minutes after I have eaten . . .
                                                          a childish
dread of eating; hunger which can have no cause,—
 
half my mind says that all this
is demeaning . . .
 
                                 Bread
 
for days on end
drives all real thought from my brain . . .
 
—Then I think, No. The ideal of being thin
 
conceals the ideal
not to have a body—;
                                     which is NOT trivial . . .
 
This wish seems now as much a "given" of my existence
 
as the intolerable
fact that I am dark-complexioned; big-boned;
and once weighed
one hundred and sixty-five pounds . . .
 
—But then I think, No. That's too simple,—
 
without a body, who can
know himself at all?
                                   Only by
acting; choosing; rejecting; have I
made myself—
                         discovered who and what Ellen can be . . .
 
—But then again I think, NO. This I is anterior
 
to name; gender; action;
fashion;
                MATTER ITSELF,—
 
. . . trying to stop my hunger with FOOD
is like trying to appease thirst
                                                   with ink.
 
* * *
 
March 30. Result of the consultation: Both gentlemen agree
completely with my prognosis and doubt any therapeutic
usefulness of commitment even more emphatically than I.
All three of us are agreed that it is not a case of obsessional
neurosis and not one of manic-depressive psychosis, and that
no definitely reliable therapy is possible. We therefore resolved
to give in to the patient's demand for discharge.
 
* * *
 
The train-ride yesterday
was far worse than I expected . . .
 
                                                         In our compartment
 
were ordinary people: a student;
a woman; her child;—
 
they had ordinary bodies, pleasant faces;
                                                                            but I thought
 
I was surrounded by creatures
 
with the pathetic, desperate
desire to be not what they were:—
 
the student was short,
and carried his body as if forcing
it to be taller—;
 
the woman showed her gums when she smiled,
and often held her
hand up to hide them—;
 
the child
seemed to cry simply because it was
small; a dwarf, and helpless . . .
 
—I was hungry. I had insisted that my husband
not bring food . . .
 
After about thirty minutes, the woman
peeled an orange
 
to quiet the child. She put a section
into its mouth—;
                               immediately it spit it out.
 
The piece fell to the floor.
 
—She pushed it with her foot through the dirt
toward me
several inches.
 
My husband saw me staring
down at the piece . . .
 
—I didn't move; how I wanted
to reach out,
                        and as if invisible
 
shove it in my mouth—;
 
my body
became rigid. As I stared at him,
I could see him staring
 
at me,—
                then he looked at the student—; at the woman—; then
back to me . . .
 
I didn't move.
 
—At last, he bent down, and
casually
               threw it out the window.
 
He looked away.
 
—I got up to leave the compartment, then
saw his face,—
 
his eyes
were red;
                and I saw
 
—I'm sure I saw—
 
disappointment.
 
* * *
 
At breakfast she eats butter and sugar, at noon she eats
so much that—for the first time in thirteen years!—she is
satisfied by her food and gets really full. At afternoon
coffee she eats chocolate creams and Easter eggs. She
takes a walk with her husband, reads poems, listens to
recordings, is in a positively festive mood, and all heavi-
ness seems to have fallen away from her. She writes
letters, the last one a letter to the fellow patient here to
whom she had become so attached. In the evening she
takes a lethal dose of poison, and on the following morn-
ing she is dead. "She looked as she had never looked in
life—calm and happy and peaceful."
 
* * *
 
Dearest.—I remember how
at eighteen,
                     on hikes with friends, when
they rested, sitting down to joke or talk,
 
I circled
around them, afraid to hike ahead alone,
 
yet afraid to rest
when I was not yet truly thin.
 
You and, yes, my husband,—
you and he
 
have by degrees drawn me within the circle;
forced me to sit down at last on the ground.
 
I am grateful.
 
But something in me refuses it.
 
—How eager I have been
to compromise, to kill this refuser,—
 
but each compromise, each attempt
to poison an ideal
which often seemed to me sterile and unreal,
 
heightens my hunger.
 
I am crippled. I disappoint you.
 
Will you greet with anger, or
happiness,
 
the news which might well reach you
before this letter?
 
Your Ellen.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Herbert White 
"When I hit her on the head, it was good,

and then I did it to her a couple of times,--
but it was funny,--afterwards,
it was as if somebody else did it ...

Everything flat, without sharpness, richness or line.

Still, I liked to drive past the woods where she lay,
tell the old lady and the kids I had to take a piss,
hop out and do it to her ...

The whole buggy of them waiting for me
made me feel good;
but still, just like I knew all along,
she didn't move.

When the body got too discomposed,
I'd just jack off, letting it fall on her ...

--It sounds crazy, but I tell you
sometimes it was beautiful--; I don't know how
to say it, but for a minute, everything was possible--;
and then,
then,--
well, like I said, she didn't move: and I saw,
under me, a little girl was just lying there in the mud:

and I knew I couldn't have done that,--
somebody else had to have done that,--
standing above her there,
in those ordinary, shitty leaves ...

--One time, I went to see Dad in a motel where he was
staying with a woman; but she was gone;
you could smell the wine in the air; and he started,
real embarrassing, to cry ...
He was still a little drunk,
and asked me to forgive him for
all he hasn't done--; but, What the shit?
Who would have wanted to stay with Mom? with bastards
not even his own kids?

I got in the truck, and started to drive
and saw a little girl--
who I picked up, hit on the head, and
screwed, and screwed, and screwed, and screwed, then

buried,
in the garden of the motel ...

--You see, ever since I was a kid I wanted
to feel things make sense: I remember

looking out the window of my room back home,--
and being almost suffocated by the asphalt;
and grass; and trees; and glass;
just there, just there, doing nothing!
not saying anything! filling me up--
but also being a wall; dead, and stopping me;
--how I wanted to see beneath it, cut

beneath it, and make it
somehow, come alive ...

The salt of the earth;
Mom once said, 'Man's spunk is the salt of the earth ...'

--That night, at that Twenty-nine Palms Motel
I had passed a million times on the road, everything

fit together; was alright;
it seemed like
everything had to be there, like I had spent years
trying, and at last finally finished drawing this
huge circle ...

--But then, suddenly I knew
somebody else did it, some bastard
had hurt a little girl--; the motel
I could see again, it had been
itself all the time, a lousy
pile of bricks, plaster, that didn't seem to
have to be there,--but was, just by chance ...

--Once, on the farm, when I was a kid,
I was screwing a goat; and the rope around his neck
when he tried to get away
pulled tight;--and just when I came,
he died ...
I came back the next day; jacked off over his body;
but it didn't do any good ...

Mom once said:
'Man's spunk is the salt of the earth, and grows kids.'

I tried so hard to come; more pain than anything else;
but didn't do any good ...

--About six months ago, I heard Dad remarried,
so I drove over to Connecticut to see him and see
if he was happy.
She was twenty-five years younger than him:
she had lots of little kids, and I don't know why,
I felt shaky ...

I stopped in front of the address; and
snuck up to the window to look in ...
--There he was, a kid
six months old on his lap, laughing
and bouncing the kid, happy in his old age
to play the papa after years of sleeping around,--
it twisted me up ...
To think that what he wouldn't give me,
he wanted to give them ...

I could have killed the bastard ...

--Naturally, I just got right back in the car,
and believe me, was determined, determined,
to head straight for home ...

but the more I drove,
I kept thinking about getting a girl,
and the more I thought I shouldn't do it,
the more I had to--

I saw her coming out of the movies,
saw she was alone, and
kept circling the blocks as she walked along them,
saying, 'You're going to leave her alone.'
'You're going to leave her alone.'

--The woods were scary!
As the seasons changed, and you saw more and more
of the skull show through, the nights became clearer,
and the buds,--erect, like nipples ...

--But then, one night,
nothing worked ...
Nothing in the sky
would blur like I wanted it to;
and I couldn't, couldn't,
get it to seem to me
that somebody else did it ...

I tried, and tried, but there was just me there,
and her, and the sharp trees
saying, "That's you standing there.
You're ...
just you."

I hope I fry.

--Hell came when I saw
MYSELF ...
and couldn't stand
what I see ..." 




The Fish
 
I caught a tremendous fish
and held him beside the boat
half out of water, with my hook
fast in a corner of his mouth.
He didn't fight.
He hadn't fought at all.
He hung a grunting weight,
battered and venerable
and homely.  Here and there
his brown skin hung in strips
like ancient wallpaper,
and its pattern of darker brown 
was like wallpaper:
shapes like full-blown roses
stained and lost through age.
He was speckled with barnacles,
fine rosettes of lime,
and infested
with tiny white sea-lice,
and underneath two or three
rags of green weed hung down.
While his gills were breathing in
the terrible oxygen
—the frightening gills,
fresh and crisp with blood,
that can cut so badly—
I thought of the coarse white flesh
packed in like feathers,
the big bones and the little bones,
the dramatic reds and blacks
of his shiny entrails,
and the pink swim-bladder
like a big peony.
I looked into his eyes
which were far larger than mine
but shallower, and yellowed,
the irises backed and packed 
with tarnished tinfoil
seen through the lenses
of old scratched isinglass.
They shifted a little, but not
to return my stare.
—It was more like the tipping 
of an object toward the light.
I admired his sullen face,
the mechanism of his jaw,
and then I saw
that from his lower lip
—if you could call it a lip 
grim, wet, and weaponlike,
hung five old pieces of fish-line,
or four and a wire leader
with the swivel still attached,
with all their five big hooks
grown firmly in his mouth.
A green line, frayed at the end
where he broke it, two heavier lines, 
and a fine black thread
still crimped from the strain and snap 
when it broke and he got away.
Like medals with their ribbons 
frayed and wavering,
a five-haired beard of wisdom
trailing from his aching jaw.
I stared and stared
and victory filled up
the little rented boat,
from the pool of bilge
where oil had spread a rainbow
around the rusted engine
to the bailer rusted orange,
the sun-cracked thwarts,
the oarlocks on their strings, 
the gunnels—until everything
was rainbow, rainbow, rainbow!
And I let the fish go.
 
 
Sandpiper
 
The roaring alongside he takes for granted,
and that every so often the world is bound to shake.
He runs, he runs to the south, finical, awkward,
in a state of controlled panic, a student of Blake.
 
The beach hisses like fat. On his left, a sheet
of interrupting water comes and goes
and glazes over his dark and brittle feet.
He runs, he runs straight through it, watching his toes.
 
—Watching, rather, the spaces of sand between them
where (no detail too small) the Atlantic drains
rapidly backwards and downwards. As he runs,
he stares at the dragging grains.
 
The world is a mist. And then the world is
minute and vast and clear. The tide
is higher or lower. He couldn't tell you which.
His beak is focussed; he is preoccupied,
 
looking for something, something, something.
Poor bird, he is obsessed!
The millions of grains are black, white, tan, and gray
mixed with quartz grains, rose and amethyst. 
 
 
The Imaginary Iceberg
 
We'd rather have the iceberg than the ship, 
although it meant the end of travel. 
Although it stood stock-still like cloudy rock 
and all the sea were moving marble. 
We'd rather have the iceberg than the ship; 
we'd rather own this breathing plain of snow 
though the ship's sails were laid upon the sea 
as the snow lies undissolved upon the water. 
O solemn, floating field, 
are you aware an iceberg takes repose 
with you, and when it wakes may pasture on your snows? 
 
This is a scene a sailor'd give his eyes for. 
The ship's ignored. The iceberg rises 
and sinks again; its glassy pinnacles 
correct elliptics in the sky. 
This is a scene where he who treads the boards 
is artlessly rhetorical. The curtain 
is light enough to rise on finest ropes 
that airy twists of snow provide. 
The wits of these white peaks 
spar with the sun. Its weight the iceberg dares 
upon a shifting stage and stands and stares. 
 
The iceberg cuts its facets from within. 
Like jewelry from a grave 
it saves itself perpetually and adorns 
only itself, perhaps the snows 
which so surprise us lying on the sea. 
Good-bye, we say, good-bye, the ship steers off 
where waves give in to one another's waves 
and clouds run in a warmer sky. 
Icebergs behoove the soul 
(both being self-made from elements least visible) 
to see them so: fleshed, fair, erected indivisible. 
 
 
Giant Snail
 
The rain has stopped. The waterfall will roar like that all night. I have come out to take a walk and feed. My body—foot, that is—is wet and cold and covered with sharp gravel. It is white, the size of a dinner plate. I have set myself a goal, a certain rock, but it may well be dawn before I get there. Although I move ghostlike and my floating edges barely graze the ground, I am heavy, heavy, heavy. My white muscles are already tired. I give the impression of mysterious ease, but it is only with the greatest effort of my will that I can rise above the smallest stones and sticks. And I must not let myself be distracted by those rough spears of grass. Don't touch them. Draw back. Withdrawal is always best.
 
The rain has stopped. The waterfall makes such a noise! (And what if I fall over it?) The mountains of black rock give off such clouds of steam! Shiny streamers are hanging down their sides. When this occurs, we have a saying that the Snail Gods have come down in haste. I could never descend such steep escarpments, much less dream of climbing them.
 
That toad was too big, too, like me. His eyes beseeched my love. Our proportions horrify our neighbors.
 
Rest a minute; relax. Flattened to the ground, my body is like a pallid, decomposing leaf. What's that tapping on my shell? Nothing. Let's go on.
 
My sides move in rhythmic waves, just off the ground, from front to back, the wake of a ship, wax-white water, or a slowly melting floe. I am cold, cold, cold as ice. My blind, white bull's head was a Cretan scare-head; degenerate, my four horns that can't attack. The sides of my mouth are now my hands. They press the earth and suck it hard. Ah, but I know my shell is beautiful, and high, and glazed, and shining. I know it well, although I have not seen it. Its curled white lip is of the finest enamel. Inside, it is as smooth as silk, and I, I fill it to perfection.
 
My wide wake shines, now it is growing dark. I leave a lovely opalescent ribbon: I know this.
 
But O! I am too big. I feel it. Pity me.
 
If and when I reach the rock, I shall go into a certain crack there for the night. The waterfall below will vibrate through my shell and body all night long. In that steady pulsing I can rest. All night I shall be like a sleeping ear.
 
    
Giant Toad

I am too big. Too big by far. Pity me. 

My eyes bulge and hurt. They are my one great beauty, even so. They see too much, above, 
below. And yet, there is not much to see. The rain has stopped. The mist is gathering on 
my skin in drops. The drops run down down my sides and drip beneath my belly. Perhaps 
the droplets on my mottled hide are pretty, like dewdrops, silver on a moldering leaf? 
They chill me through and through. I feel my colors changing now, my pigments gradually 
shudder and shift over. 

Now I shall get beneath that overhanging ledge. Slowly. Hop. Two or three times more, 
silently. That was too far. I'm standing up. The lichen's gray, and rough to my front feet. 
Get down. Turn facing out, it's safer. Don't breathe until the snail gets by. But we go 
travelling the same weathers. 

Swallow the air and mouthfuls of cold mist. Give voice, just once. O how it echoed from 
the rock! What a profound, angelic bell I rang! 

I live, I breathe, by swallowing. Once, some naughty children picked me up, me and 
two brothers. They set us down again somewhere and in our mouths they put lit cigarettes. 
We could not help but smoke them, to the end. I thought it was the death of me, but when 
I was entirely filled with smoke, when my slack mouth was burning, and all my tripes 
were and dry, they let us go. But I was sick for days. 

I have big shoulders, like a boxer. They are not muscle, however, and their color is dark. 
They are my sacs of poison, the almost unused poison that I bear, my burden and my 
great responsibility. Big wings of poison, folded on my back. Beware, I am an angel 
in disguise; my wings are evil, but not deadly. If I will it, the poison could break through, 
blue-black,and dangerous to all. Blue-black fumes would rise upon the air. Beware, 
you frivolous crab. 
 
12 O'Clock News

gooseneck
lamp

As you all know, tonight is the night of the full
moon, half the world over. But here the moon
seems to hang motionless in the sky. It gives very
little light; it could be dead. Visibility is poor.
Nevertheless, we shall try to give you some idea of
the lay of the land and the present situation. 

typewriter

The escapement that rises abruptly from the central
plain is in heavy shadow, but the elaborate terrac-
ing of its southern glacis gleams faintly in the dim
light, like fish scales. What endless labor those
small, peculiarly shaped terraces represent! And
yet, on them the welfare of this tiny principality
depends. 

pile of mss.

A slight landslide occurred in the northwest about
an hour ago. The exposed soil appears to be of poor
quality: almost white, calcareous, and shaly. There
are believed to have been no casualties. 

typed sheet

Almost due north, our aerial reconnaissance reports
the discovery of a large rectangular ‘field’, hitherto
unknown to us, obviously man-made. It is dark-
speckled. An airstrip? A cemetery? 

envelopes

In this small, backward country, one of the most
backward left in the world today, communications
are crude and “industrialization” and its products
almost nonexistent. Strange to say, however, sign-
boards are on a truly gigantic scale. 

ink-bottle

We have also received reports of a mysterious, oddly
shaped, black structure, at an undisclosed distance
to the east. Its presence was revealed only because
its highly polished surface catches such feeble
moonlight as prevails. The natural resources of the
country being far from completely known to us,
there is the possibility that this may be, or may
contain, some powerful and terrifying “secret
weapon”. On the other hand, given what we do
know, or have learned from our anthropologists
and sociologists about this people, it may well be
nothing more than a numen, or a great altar
recently erected to one of their gods, to which, in
their present historical state of superstition and
helplessness, they attribute magical power, and
may even regard as a “savior,” one last hope of
rescue from their grave difficulties. 

typewriter
eraser

At last! One of the elusive natives has been spotted!
He appears to be—rather, to have been—a
unicyclist-courier, who may have met his end by
falling from the height of the escarpment because
of the deceptive illumination. Alive, he would have
been small, but undoubtedly proud and erect, with
the thick, bristling black hair typical of the
indigenes. 

ashtray

From our superior vantage point, we can clearly see
into a sort of dugout, possibly a shell crater, a “nest”
of soldiers. They lie heaped together, wearing the
camouflage “battle dress” intended for “winter war-
fare”. They are in hideously contorted position, all
dead. We can make out at least eight bodies. These
uniforms were designed to be used in guerilla
warfare on the country's one snow-covered moun-
tain peak. The fact that these poor soldiers are
wearing them here, on the plain, gives further
proof, if proof were necessary, either of the childish-
ness and hopeless impracticality of this inscrutable
people, our opponents, or of the sad corruption of their
leaders.

 

 

The Map
 
Land lies in water; it is shadowed green.
Shadows, or are they shallows, at its edges
showing the line of long sea-weeded ledges
where weeds hang to the simple blue from green.
Or does the land lean down to lift the sea from under,
drawing it unperturbed around itself?
Along the fine tan sandy shelf
is the land tugging at the sea from under?
 
The shadow of Newfoundland lies flat and still.
Labrador's yellow, where the moony Eskimo
has oiled it. We can stroke these lovely bays,
under a glass as if they were expected to blossom,
or as if to provide a clean cage for invisible fish.
The names of seashore towns run out to sea,
the names of cities cross the neighboring mountains
—the printer here experiencing the same excitement
as when emotion too far exceeds its cause.
These peninsulas take the water between thumb and finger
like women feeling for the smoothness of yard-goods.
 
Mapped waters are more quiet than the land is,
lending the land their waves' own conformation:
and Norway's hare runs south in agitation,
profiles investigate the sea, where land is.
Are they assigned, or can the countries pick their colors?
—What suits the character or the native waters best.
Topography displays no favorites; North's as near as West.
More delicate than the historians' are the map-makers' colors. 
 
 
 
The Man-Moth
 
Man-Moth: Newspaper misprint for "mammoth."
      
          Here, above,
cracks in the buldings are filled with battered moonlight.
The whole shadow of Man is only as big as his hat.
It lies at his feet like a circle for a doll to stand on,
and he makes an inverted pin, the point magnetized to the moon.
He does not see the moon; he observes only her vast properties,
feeling the queer light on his hands, neither warm nor cold,
of a temperature impossible to records in thermometers.
 
          But when the Man-Moth
pays his rare, although occasional, visits to the surface,
the moon looks rather different to him.  He emerges
from an opening under the edge of one of the sidewalks
and nervously begins to scale the faces of the buildings.
He thinks the moon is a small hole at the top of the sky,
proving the sky quite useless for protection.
He trembles, but must investigate as high as he can climb.
 
          Up the façades,
his shadow dragging like a photographer's cloth behind him
he climbs fearfully, thinking that this time he will manage
to push his small head through that round clean opening
and be forced through, as from a tube, in black scrolls on the light.
(Man, standing below him, has no such illusions.)
But what the Man-Moth fears most he must do, although 
he fails, of course, and falls back scared but quite unhurt.
 
          Then he returns
to the pale subways of cement he calls his home. He flits,
he flutters, and cannot get aboard the silent trains
fast enough to suit him.  The doors close swiftly.
The Man-Moth always seats himself facing the wrong way
and the train starts at once at its full, terrible speed, 
without a shift in gears or a gradation of any sort.
He cannot tell the rate at which he travels backwards.
 
          Each night he must
be carried through artificial tunnels and dream recurrent dreams.
Just as the ties recur beneath his train, these underlie
his rushing brain.  He does not dare look out the window,
for the third rail, the unbroken draught of poison,
runs there beside him. He regards it as a disease
he has inherited the susceptibility to.  He has to keep 
his hands in his pockets, as others must wear mufflers.
 
          If you catch him,
hold up a flashlight to his eye.  It's all dark pupil,
an entire night itself, whose haired horizon tightens
as he stares back, and closes up the eye.  Then from the lids 
one tear, his only possession, like the bee's sting, slips.
Slyly he palms it, and if you're not paying attention
he'll swallow it.  However, if you watch, he'll hand it over,
cool as from underground springs and pure enough to drink.
 
 
In the Waiting Room
 
In Worcester, Massachusetts,
I went with Aunt Consuelo
to keep her dentist's appointment
and sat and waited for her
in the dentist's waiting room.
It was winter. It got dark
early. The waiting room
was full of grown-up people,
arctics and overcoats,
lamps and magazines.
My aunt was inside
what seemed like a long time
and while I waited I read
the National Geographic 
(I could read) and carefully 
studied the photographs:
the inside of a volcano,
black, and full of ashes;
then it was spilling over
in rivulets of fire.
Osa and Martin Johnson 
dressed in riding breeches,
laced boots, and pith helmets.
A dead man slung on a pole
—"Long Pig," the caption said.
Babies with pointed heads
wound round and round with string;
black, naked women with necks
wound round and round with wire
like the necks of light bulbs.
Their breasts were horrifying.
I read it right straight through.
I was too shy to stop.
And then I looked at the cover:
the yellow margins, the date.
Suddenly, from inside,
came an oh! of pain
—Aunt Consuelo's voice—
not very loud or long.
I wasn't at all surprised;
even then I knew she was 
a foolish, timid woman.
I might have been embarrassed,
but wasn't.  What took me
completely by surprise
was that it was me:
my voice, in my mouth.
Without thinking at all
I was my foolish aunt,
I—we—were falling, falling,
our eyes glued to the cover
of the National Geographic,
February, 1918.
 
I said to myself: three days
and you'll be seven years old.
I was saying it to stop
the sensation of falling off
the round, turning world.
into cold, blue-black space.
But I felt: you are an I,
you are an Elizabeth,
you are one of them.
Why should you be one, too?
I scarcely dared to look
to see what it was I was.
I gave a sidelong glance
—I couldn't look any higher—
at shadowy gray knees,
trousers and skirts and boots
and different pairs of hands
lying under the lamps.
I knew that nothing stranger
had ever happened, that nothing
stranger could ever happen.
 
Why should I be my aunt,
or me, or anyone?
What similarities—
boots, hands, the family voice
I felt in my throat, or even
the National Geographic
and those awful hanging breasts--
held us all together
or made us all just one?
How--I didn't know any
word for it--how "unlikely". . .
How had I come to be here,
like them, and overhear
a cry of pain that could have
got loud and worse but hadn't?
 
The waiting room was bright
and too hot. It was sliding
beneath a big black wave,
another, and another.
 
Then I was back in it.
The War was on. Outside,
in Worcester, Massachusetts,
were night and slush and cold,
and it was still the fifth 
of February, 1918.
 
 
First Death in Nova Scotia
 
In the cold, cold parlor
my mother laid out Arthur
beneath the chromographs:
Edward, Prince of Wales,
with Princess Alexandra,
and King George with Queen Mary.
Below them on the table
stood a stuffed loon
shot and stuffed by Uncle
Arthur, Arthur's father.
 
Since Uncle Arthur fired
a bullet into him,
he hadn't said a word.
He kept his own counsel
on his white, frozen lake,
the marble-topped table.
His breast was deep and white,
cold and caressable;
his eyes were red glass,
much to be desired.
 
"Come," said my mother,
"Come and say good-bye
to your little cousin Arthur."
I was lifted up and given
one lily of the valley
to put in Arthur's hand.
Arthur's coffin was
a little frosted cake,
and the red-eyed loon eyed it
from his white, frozen lake.
 
Arthur was very small.
He was all white, like a doll
that hadn't been painted yet.
Jack Frost had started to paint him
the way he always painted
the Maple Leaf (Forever).
He had just begun on his hair,
a few red strokes, and then
Jack Frost had dropped the brush
and left him white, forever.
 
The gracious royal couples
were warm in red and ermine;
their feet were well wrapped up
in the ladies' ermine trains.
They invited Arthur to be
the smallest page at court.
But how could Arthur go,
clutching his tiny lily,
with his eyes shut up so tight
and the roads deep in snow? 
 
Sestina

September rain falls on the house. 
In the failing light, the old grandmother 
sits in the kitchen with the child 
beside the Little Marvel Stove, 
reading the jokes from the almanac, 
laughing and talking to hide her tears.

She thinks that her equinoctial tears 
and the rain that beats on the roof of the house 
were both foretold by the almanac, 
but only known to a grandmother. 
The iron kettle sings on the stove. 
She cuts some bread and says to the child,

It's time for tea now; but the child 
is watching the teakettle's small hard tears 
dance like mad on the hot black stove, 
the way the rain must dance on the house. 
Tidying up, the old grandmother 
hangs up the clever almanac

on its string.  Birdlike, the almanac 
hovers half open above the child, 
hovers above the old grandmother 
and her teacup full of dark brown tears. 
She shivers and says she thinks the house 
feels chilly, and puts more wood in the stove.

It was to be, says the Marvel Stove. 
I know what I know, says the almanac. 
With crayons the child draws a rigid house 
and a winding pathway.  Then the child 
puts in a man with buttons like tears 
and shows it proudly to the grandmother.

But secretly, while the grandmother 
busies herself about the stove, 
the little moons falls down like tears 
from between the pages of the almanac 
into the flower bed the child 
has carefully placed in the front of the house.

Time to plant tears, says the almanac. 
The grandmother sings to the marvelous stove 
and the child draws another inscrutable house.

 

 

A Miracle for Breakfast

At six o'clock we were waiting for coffee, 
waiting for coffee and the charitable crumb 
that was going to be served from a certain balcony 
--like kings of old, or like a miracle. 
It was still dark. One foot of the sun 
steadied itself on a long ripple in the river. 

The first ferry of the day had just crossed the river. 
It was so cold we hoped that the coffee 
would be very hot, seeing that the sun 
was not going to warm us; and that the crumb 
would be a loaf each, buttered, by a miracle. 
At seven a man stepped out on the balcony. 

He stood for a minute alone on the balcony 
looking over our heads toward the river. 
A servant handed him the makings of a miracle, 
consisting of one lone cup of coffee 
and one roll, which he proceeded to crumb, 
his head, so to speak, in the clouds--along with the sun. 

Was the man crazy? What under the sun 
was he trying to do, up there on his balcony! 
Each man received one rather hard crumb, 
which some flicked scornfully into the river, 
and, in a cup, one drop of the coffee. 
Some of us stood around, waiting for the miracle. 

I can tell what I saw next; it was not a miracle. 
A beautiful villa stood in the sun 
and from its doors came the smell of hot coffee. 
In front, a baroque white plaster balcony 
added by birds, who nest along the river, 
--I saw it with one eye close to the crumb-- 

and galleries and marble chambers. My crumb 
my mansion, made for me by a miracle, 
through ages, by insects, birds, and the river 
working the stone. Every day, in the sun, 
at breakfast time I sit on my balcony 
with my feet up, and drink gallons of coffee. 

We licked up the crumb and swallowed the coffee. 
A window across the river caught the sun 
as if the miracle were working, on the wrong balcony.

 

Questions of Travel

There are too many waterfalls here; the crowded streams 
hurry too rapidly down to the sea, 
and the pressure of so many clouds on the mountaintops 
makes them spill over the sides in soft slow-motion, 
turning to waterfalls under our very eyes. 
--For if those streaks, those mile-long, shiny, tearstains, 
aren't waterfalls yet, 
in a quick age or so, as ages go here, 
they probably will be. 
But if the streams and clouds keep travelling, travelling, 
the mountains look like the hulls of capsized ships, 
slime-hung and barnacled. 

Think of the long trip home. 
Should we have stayed at home and thought of here? 
Where should we be today? 
Is it right to be watching strangers in a play 
in this strangest of theatres? 
What childishness is it that while there's a breath of life 
in our bodies, we are determined to rush 
to see the sun the other way around? 
The tiniest green hummingbird in the world? 
To stare at some inexplicable old stonework, 
inexplicable and impenetrable, 
at any view, 
instantly seen and always, always delightful? 
Oh, must we dream our dreams 
and have them, too? 
And have we room 
for one more folded sunset, still quite warm? 

But surely it would have been a pity 
not to have seen the trees along this road, 
really exaggerated in their beauty, 
not to have seen them gesturing 
like noble pantomimists, robed in pink. 
--Not to have had to stop for gas and heard 
the sad, two-noted, wooden tune 
of disparate wooden clogs 
carelessly clacking over 
a grease-stained filling-station floor. 
(In another country the clogs would all be tested. 
Each pair there would have identical pitch.) 
--A pity not to have heard 
the other, less primitive music of the fat brown bird 
who sings above the broken gasoline pump 
in a bamboo church of Jesuit baroque: 
three towers, five silver crosses. 
--Yes, a pity not to have pondered, 
blurr'dly and inconclusively, 
on what connection can exist for centuries 
between the crudest wooden footwear 
and, careful and finicky, 
the whittled fantasies of wooden footwear 
and, careful and finicky, 
the whittled fantasies of wooden cages. 
--Never to have studied history in 
the weak calligraphy of songbirds' cages. 
--And never to have had to listen to rain 
so much like politicians' speeches: 
two hours of unrelenting oratory 
and then a sudden golden silence 
in which the traveller takes a notebook, writes: 

"Is it lack of imagination that makes us come 
to imagined places, not just stay at home? 
Or could Pascal have been not entirely right 
about just sitting quietly in one's room? 

Continent, city, country, society: 
the choice is never wide and never free. 
And here, or there . . . No. Should we have stayed at home, 
wherever that may be?"

 

Song for the Rainy Season

Hidden, oh hidden 
in the high fog 
the house we live in, 
beneath the magnetic rock, 
rain-, rainbow-ridden, 
where blood-black 
bromelias, lichens, 
owls, and the lint 
of the waterfalls cling, 
familiar, unbidden. 

In a dim age 
of water 
the brook sings loud 
from a rib cage 
of giant fern; vapor 
climbs up the thick growth 
effortlessly, turns back, 
holding them both, 
house and rock, 
in a private cloud. 

At night, on the roof, 
blind drops crawl 
and the ordinary brown 
owl gives us proof 
he can count: 
five times--always five-- 
he stamps and takes off 
after the fat frogs that, 
shrilling for love, 
clamber and mount. 

House, open house 
to the white dew 
and the milk-white sunrise 
kind to the eyes, 
to membership 
of silver fish, mouse, 
bookworms, 
big moths; with a wall 
for the mildew's 
ignorant map; 

darkened and tarnished 
by the warm touch 
of the warm breath, 
maculate, cherished; 
rejoice! For a later 
era will differ. 
(O difference that kills 
or intimidates, much 
of all our small shadowy 
life!) Without water 

the great rock will stare 
unmagnetized, bare, 
no longer wearing 
rainbows or rain, 
the forgiving air 
and the high fog gone; 
the owls will move on 
and the several 
waterfalls shrivel 
in the steady sun. 

 

Filling Stations

Oh, but it is dirty!
--this little filling station,
oil-soaked, oil-permeated
to a disturbing, over-all
Be careful with that match!

Father wears a dirty,
oil-soaked monkey suit
that cuts him under the arms,
and several quick and saucy
and greasy sons assist him
(it's a family filling station),
all quite thoroughly dirty.

Do they live in the station?
It has a cement porch
behind the pumps, and on it
a set of crushed and grease-
impregnated wickerwork;
on the wicker sofa
a dirty dog, quite comfy.

Some comic books provide
the only note of color--
of certain color. They lie
upon a big dim doily
draping a taboret
(part of the set), beside
a big hirsute begonia.

Why the extraneous plant?
Why the taboret?
Why, oh why, the doily?
(Embroidered in daisy stitch
with marguerites, I think,
and heavy with gray crochet.)

Somebody embroidered the doily.
Somebody waters the plant,
or oils it, maybe. Somebody
arranges the rows of cans
so that they softly say:
ESSO--SO--SO--SO

to high-strung automobiles.
Somebody loves us all.


In the Waiting Room
 
In Worcester, Massachusetts,
I went with Aunt Consuelo
to keep her dentist's appointment
and sat and waited for her
in the dentist's waiting room.
It was winter. It got dark
early. The waiting room
was full of grown-up people,
arctics and overcoats,
lamps and magazines.
My aunt was inside
what seemed like a long time
and while I waited I read
the National Geographic 
(I could read) and carefully 
studied the photographs:
the inside of a volcano,
black, and full of ashes;
then it was spilling over
in rivulets of fire.
Osa and Martin Johnson 
dressed in riding breeches,
laced boots, and pith helmets.
A dead man slung on a pole
—"Long Pig," the caption said.
Babies with pointed heads
wound round and round with string;
black, naked women with necks
wound round and round with wire
like the necks of light bulbs.
Their breasts were horrifying.
I read it right straight through.
I was too shy to stop.
And then I looked at the cover:
the yellow margins, the date.
Suddenly, from inside,
came an oh! of pain
—Aunt Consuelo's voice—
not very loud or long.
I wasn't at all surprised;
even then I knew she was 
a foolish, timid woman.
I might have been embarrassed,
but wasn't.  What took me
completely by surprise
was that it was me:
my voice, in my mouth.
Without thinking at all
I was my foolish aunt,
I—we—were falling, falling,
our eyes glued to the cover
of the National Geographic,
February, 1918.
 
I said to myself: three days
and you'll be seven years old.
I was saying it to stop
the sensation of falling off
the round, turning world.
into cold, blue-black space.
But I felt: you are an I,
you are an Elizabeth,
you are one of them.
Why should you be one, too?
I scarcely dared to look
to see what it was I was.
I gave a sidelong glance
—I couldn't look any higher—
at shadowy gray knees,
trousers and skirts and boots
and different pairs of hands
lying under the lamps.
I knew that nothing stranger
had ever happened, that nothing
stranger could ever happen.
 
Why should I be my aunt,
or me, or anyone?
What similarities—
boots, hands, the family voice
I felt in my throat, or even
the National Geographic
and those awful hanging breasts--
held us all together
or made us all just one?
How--I didn't know any
word for it--how "unlikely". . .
How had I come to be here,
like them, and overhear
a cry of pain that could have
got loud and worse but hadn't?
 
The waiting room was bright
and too hot. It was sliding
beneath a big black wave,
another, and another.
 
Then I was back in it.
The War was on. Outside,
in Worcester, Massachusetts,
were night and slush and cold,
and it was still the fifth 
of February, 1918.
 
 
First Death in Nova Scotia
 
In the cold, cold parlor
my mother laid out Arthur
beneath the chromographs:
Edward, Prince of Wales,
with Princess Alexandra,
and King George with Queen Mary.
Below them on the table
stood a stuffed loon
shot and stuffed by Uncle
Arthur, Arthur's father.
 
Since Uncle Arthur fired
a bullet into him,
he hadn't said a word.
He kept his own counsel
on his white, frozen lake,
the marble-topped table.
His breast was deep and white,
cold and caressable;
his eyes were red glass,
much to be desired.
 
"Come," said my mother,
"Come and say good-bye
to your little cousin Arthur."
I was lifted up and given
one lily of the valley
to put in Arthur's hand.
Arthur's coffin was
a little frosted cake,
and the red-eyed loon eyed it
from his white, frozen lake.
 
Arthur was very small.
He was all white, like a doll
that hadn't been painted yet.
Jack Frost had started to paint him
the way he always painted
the Maple Leaf (Forever).
He had just begun on his hair,
a few red strokes, and then
Jack Frost had dropped the brush
and left him white, forever.
 
The gracious royal couples
were warm in red and ermine;
their feet were well wrapped up
in the ladies' ermine trains.
They invited Arthur to be
the smallest page at court.
But how could Arthur go,
clutching his tiny lily,
with his eyes shut up so tight
and the roads deep in snow? 
 
Sestina


September rain falls on the house. 
In the failing light, the old grandmother 
sits in the kitchen with the child 
beside the Little Marvel Stove, 
reading the jokes from the almanac, 
laughing and talking to hide her tears.

She thinks that her equinoctial tears 
and the rain that beats on the roof of the house 
were both foretold by the almanac, 
but only known to a grandmother. 
The iron kettle sings on the stove. 
She cuts some bread and says to the child,

It's time for tea now; but the child 
is watching the teakettle's small hard tears 
dance like mad on the hot black stove, 
the way the rain must dance on the house. 
Tidying up, the old grandmother 
hangs up the clever almanac

on its string.  Birdlike, the almanac 
hovers half open above the child, 
hovers above the old grandmother 
and her teacup full of dark brown tears. 
She shivers and says she thinks the house 
feels chilly, and puts more wood in the stove.

It was to be, says the Marvel Stove. 
I know what I know, says the almanac. 
With crayons the child draws a rigid house 
and a winding pathway.  Then the child 
puts in a man with buttons like tears 
and shows it proudly to the grandmother.

But secretly, while the grandmother 
busies herself about the stove, 
the little moons falls down like tears 
from between the pages of the almanac 
into the flower bed the child 
has carefully placed in the front of the house.

Time to plant tears, says the almanac. 
The grandmother sings to the marvelous stove 
and the child draws another inscrutable house.



I Am Waiting

I am waiting for my case to come up
and I am waiting
for a rebirth of wonder
and I am waiting for someone
to really discover America
and wail
and I am waiting
for the discovery
Of a new symbolic western frontier
and I am waiting
for the American Eagle
to really spread its wings
and straighten up and fly right
and I am waiting for the Age of Anxiety
to drop dead
and I am waiting
for the war to be fought
which will make the world safe 
for anarchy
and I am waiting for the final withering away
of all governments
and I am perpetually awaiting
a rebirth of wonder


I am waiting for the second coming
and I am waiting
for a religious revival
to sweep thru the state of Arizona
and I am waiting
for the grapes of wrath to stored
and I am waiting
for them to prove
that God is really American
and I am waiting
to see God on television
piped into church altars
if they can find
the right channel
to tune it in on
and I am waiting 
for the last supper to be served again
and a strange new appetizer
and I am perpetually awaiting
a rebirth of wonder


I am waiting for my number to be called
and I am waiting
for the Salvation Army to take over
and I am waiting
for the meek to be blessed
and inherit the earth
without taxes
and I am waiting
for forests and animals
to reclaim the earth as theirs
and I am waiting
for a way to be devised
to destroy all nationalisms
without killing anybody
and I am waiting 
for linnets and planets to fall like rain
and I am waiting for lovers and weepers
to lie down together again
in a new rebirth of wonder


I am waiting for the great divide to be crossed
and I anxiously waiting
for the secret of eternal life to be discovered
by an obscure practitioner
and I am waiting
for the storms of life
to be over
and I am waiting to set sail for happiness
and I am waiting
for a reconstructed Mayflower
to reach America
with its picture story and TV rights
sold in advance to the natives
and I am waiting
for the lost music to sound again
in the Lost Continent
in a new rebirth of wonder


I am waiting for the day
that maketh all things clear
and I am waiting for retribution
for what America did to Tom Sawyer
and I am waiting
for the American Boy
to take off Beauty's clothes
and get on top of her
and I am waiting
for Alice in Wonderland
her total dream of innocence
and I am waiting
for Childe Roland to come
to the final darkest tower
and I am waiting for Aphrodite 
to grow live arms
at a final disarmament conference
in a new rebirth of wonder


I am waiting
to get some intimations
of immortality
by recollecting my early childhood
and I am waiting
for the green mornings to come again
for some strains of unpremeditated art
to shake my typewriter
and I am waiting to write
the great indelible poem
and I am waiting
for the last long rapture
and I am perpetually waiting
for the fleeting lovers on the Grecian Urn
to catch each other at last
and embrace
and I am awaiting
perpetually and forever
a renaissance of wonder
 

Number 20 (froom A Coney Island of the Mind)

        The pennycandystore beyond the El
       is where I first
                       fell in love
                                   with unreality
       Jellybeans glowed in the semi-gloom
       of that september afternoon
       A cat upon the counter moved among
                                 the licorice sticks
                      and tootsie rolls
              and Oh Boy Gum

       Outside the leaves were falling as they died

       A wind had blown away the sun

       A girl ran in 
       Her hair was rainy
       Her breasts were breathless in the little room

       Outside the leaves were falling
                            and they cried
                                         Too soon!  too soon!

Ode to My Socks 
 

Maru Mori brought me 
a pair 
of socks 
which she knitted herself 
with her sheepherder's hands, 
two socks as soft as rabbits. 
I slipped my feet 
into them 
as though into 
two 
cases 
knitted 
with threads of 
twilight 
and goatskin. 
Violent socks, 
my feet were 
two fish made 
of wool, 
two long sharks 
sea-blue, shot 
through 
by one golden thread, 
two immense blackbirds, 
two cannons: 
my feet 
were honored 
in this way 
by 
these 
heavenly 
socks. 
They were 
so handsome 
for the first time 
my feet seemed to me 
unacceptable 
like two decrepit 
firemen, firemen 
unworthy 
of that woven 
fire, 
of those glowing 
socks.

Nevertheless 
I resisted 
the sharp temptation 
to save them somewhere 
as schoolboys 
keep 
fireflies, 
as learned men 
collect 
sacred texts, 
I resisted 
the mad impulse 
to put them 
into a golden 
cage 
and each day give them 
birdseed 
and pieces of pink melon. 
Like exploreres 
in the jungle who hand 
over the very rare 
green deer 
to the spit 
and eat it 
with remorse, 
I stretched out 
my feet 
and pulled on 
the magnificent 
socks 
and then my shoes.

The moral 
of my ode is this: 
beauty is twice 
beauty 
and what is good is doubly 
good 
when it is a matter of two socks 
made of wool 
in winter.

  
 

Ode to Salt

This salt 
in the saltcellar 
I once saw in the salt mines. 
I know 
you won't 
believe me, 
but 
it sings, 
salt sings, the skin 
of the salt mines, 
sings 
with a mouth smothered 
by the earth. 
I shivered in those 
solitudes 
when I heard 
the voice 
of 
the salt 
in the desert. 
Near Antofagasta 
the nitrous 
pampa 
resounds: 
a 
broken 
voice, 
a mournful 
song.

In its caves 
the salt moans, mountain 
of buried light, 
crystal of the sea, oblivion 
of the waves.

And then on every table 
in the world, 
salt, 
we see your piquant 
powder 
sprinkling 
vital light 
upon 
our food. 
Preserver 
of the ancient 
holds of ships, 
discoverer 
on 
the high seas, 
earliest 
sailor 
of the unknown, shifting 
byways of the foam. 
Dust of the sea, in you 
the tongue receives a kiss 
from ocean night: 
taste imparts to every seasoned 
dish your ocean essence; 
the smallest 
miniature 
wave from the saltcellar 
reveals to us 
more than domestic whitenesss; 
in it, we taste infinitude.

 

Ode to the Watermelon

The tree of intense 
summer, 
hard, 
is all blue sky, 
yellow sun, fatigue in drops, 
a sword 
above the highways, 
a scorched shoe 
in the cities: 
the brightness and the world 
weigh us down, 
hit us 
in the eyes 
with clouds of dust, 
with sudden golden blows, 
they torture 
our feet 
with tiny thorns, 
with hot stones, 
and the mouth 
suffers 
more than all the toes: 
the throat 
becomes thirsty, 
the teeth, 
the lips, the tongue: 
we want to drink 
waterfalls, 
the dark blue night, 
the South Pole, 
and then 
the coolest of all 
the planets crosses 
the sky, 
the round, magnificent, 
star-filled watermelon.

It's a fruit from the thirst-tree. 
It's the green whale of the summer.

The dry universe 
all at once 
given dark stars 
by this firmament of coolness 
lets the swelling 
fruit 
come down: 
its hemispheres open 
showing a flag 
green, white, red, 
that dissolves into 
wild rivers, sugar, 
delight!

Jewel box of water, phlegmatic 
queen 
of the fruitshops, 
warehouse 
of profundity, moon 
on earth! 
You are pure, 
rubies fall apart 
in your abundance, 
and we 
want 
to bite into you, 
to bury our 
face 
in you, and 
our hair, and 
the soul! 
When we're thirsty 
we glimpse you 
like 
a mine or a mountain 
of fantastic food, 
but 
among our longings and our teeth 
you change 
simply 
into cool light 
that slips in turn into 
spring water 
that touched us once 
singing. 
And that is why 
you don't weigh us down 
in the siesta hour 
that's like an oven, 
you don't weigh us down, 
you just 
go by 
and your heart, some cold ember, 
turned itself into a single 
drop of water.

 

America, I Do Not Call Your Name without Hope

America, I do not call your name without hope. 
When I hold the sword against the heart, 
when I live with the faulty roof in the soul, 
when one of your new days 
pierces me coming through the windows, 
I am and I stand in the light that produces me, 
I live in the darkness which makes me what I am, 
I sleep and awake in your fundamental sunrise: 
as mild as the grapes, and as terrible, 
carrier of sugar and the whip, 
soaked in the sperm of your species, 
nursed on the blood of your inheritance.

 

Body of a Woman

Body of a woman, white hills, white thighs, 
you like a world, lying in surrentder. 
My rough peasant's body digs in you 
and makes the son leap from the depth of the earth.

I was alone like a tunnel.  The birds fled from me, 
and night swamped me with its crushing invasion. 
To survive myself I forged you like a weapon, 
like an arrow in my bow, a stone in my sling.

But the hour of vengeance falls, and I love you. 
Body of skin, of moss, of eager and firm milk. 
Oh the goblets of the breast!  Oh the eyes of absence! 
Oh the roses of the publis!  Oh your voice, slow and sad!

Body of my woman, I will persist in your grace. 
My thirst, my boundless desire, my shifting road! 
Dark river-beds where the eternal thirst flows 
and weariness follows, and the infinite ache.

 

Walking Around

It so happens I'm tired of just being a man. 
I go to a movie, drop in at the tailor's--it so happens-- 
feeling wizened and numbed, like a big, wooly swan, 
awash on an ocean of clinkers and causes.

A whiff from a barbershop does it; I yell bloody murder. 
All I ask is a little vacation from things:  from boulders and woolens, 
from gardens, institutional projects, merchandise, 
eyeglasses, elevators--I'd rather not look at them.

It so happens I'm fed up--with my feet and my fingernails 
and my hair and my shadow. 
Being a man leaves me cold:  that's how it is.

Still—it would be lovely 
to wave a cut lily and panic a notary, 
or finish a nun with a left to the ear. 
It would be nice 
just to walk down the street with a green switchblade handy, 
whooping it up till I die of the shivers.

I won't live like this—like a root in a shadow, 
wide-open and wondering, teeth chattering sleepily, 
going down to the dripping entrails of the universe 
absorbing things, talking things in, eating three squares a day.

I've had all I'll take from catastrophe. 
I won't have it this way, muddling through like a root or a grave, 
all alone underground, in a morgue of cadavers, 
cold as a stiff, dying of misery.

That's why Monday flares up like an oil-slick, 
when it sees me up close, with the face of a jailbird, 
or squeaks like a broken-down wheel as it goes, 
stepping hot-blooded into the night.

Something shoves me toward certain damp houses, into certain dark corners, 
into hospitals, with bones flying out of the windows; 
into shoe stores and shoemakers smelling of vinegar, 
streets frightful as fissures laid open.

There, trussed to the doors of the houses I loathe 
are the sulphurous birds, in a horror of tripes, 
dental plates lost in a coffeepot, mirrors 
that must surely have wept with the nightmare and shame of it all; 
and everywhere, poisons, umbrellas, and belly buttons.

I stroll unabashed, in my eyes and my shoes 
and my rage and oblivion. 
I go on, crossing offices, retail orthopedics, 
courtyards with laundry hung out on a wire; 
the blouses and towels and the drawers newly washed, 
slowly dribbling a slovenly tear.


 


It so happens I am sick of being a man. 
And it happens that I walk into tailorshops and movie houses 
dried up, waterproof, like a swan made of felt 
steering my way in a water of wombs and ashes.

The smell of barbershops makes me break into hoarse sobs. 
The only thing I want is to lie still like stones or wool. 
The only thing I want is to see no more stores, no gardens, 
no more goods, no spectacles, no elevators.

It so happens I am sick of my feet and my nails 
and my hair and my shadow. 
It so happens I am sick of being a man.

Still it would be marvelous 
to terrify a law clerk with a cut lilly, 
or kill a nun with a blow on the ear. 
It would be great 
to go through the streets with a green knife 
letting out yells until I died of the cold.

I don't want to go on being a root in the dark, 
insecure, stretched out, shivering with sleep, 
going on down, into the moist guts of the earth, 
taking in and thinking, eating every day.

I don't want so much misery. 
I don't want to go on as a root and a tomb, 
alone under the ground, a warehouse with corpses, 
half frozen, dying of grief.

That's why Monday, when it sees me coming 
with my convict face, blazes up like gasoline, 
and it howls on its way like a wounded wheel, 
and leaves tracks full of warm blood leading toward the night.

And it pushes me into certain corners, into some moist houses, 
into hospitals where the bones fly out the window, 
into shoeshops that smell like vinegar, 
and certain streets hideous as cracks in the skin.

There are sulpher-colored birds, and hideous intestines 
hanging over the doors of houses that I hate, 
and there are false teeth forgotten in a coffeepot, 
there are mirrors 
that ought to have wept from shame and terror, 
there are umbrellas everywhere, and venoms, and umbilical cords.

I stroll along serenely, with my eyes, my shoes, 
my rage, forgetting everything, 
I walk by, going through the office buildings and orthopedic shops, 
and courtyards with washing hanging from the line: 
underwear, towels and shirts from which slow 
dirty tears are falling.

 


It happens that I am tired of being a man. 
It happens that I go into the tailor's shops and the movies 
all shrivelled up, impenetrable, like a felt swan 
navigating on a water of origin and ash.

The smell of barber shops makes me sob out loud. 
I want nothing but the repose either of stone or of wool. 
I want to see no more establishments, no more gardens, 
nor merchandise, nor glasses, nor elevators.

It happens that I am tired of my feet and my nails 
and my hair and my shadow. 
It happens that I am tired of being a man.

Just the same it would be delicious 
to scare a notary with a cut lily 
or knock a nun stone dead with one blow of an ear. 
It would be beautiful 
to go through the streets with a green knife 
shouting until I died of cold.

I do not want to go on being a root in the dark, 
hesitating, stretched out, shivering with dreams, 
downwards, in the wet tripe of the earth, 
soaking it up and thinking, eating every day.

I do not want to be the inheritor of so many misfortunes. 
I do not want to continue as a root and as a tomb, 
as a solitary tunnel, as a cellar full of corpses, 
stiff with cold, dying with pain.

For this reason Monday burns like oil 
at the sight of me arriving with my jail-face, 
and it howls in passing like a wounded wheel, 
and its footsteps towards nightfall are filled with hot blood.

And it shoves me along to certain corners, to certain damp houses, 
to hospitals where the bones come out of the windows, 
to certain cobbler's shops smelling of vinegar, 
to streets horrendous as crevices.

There are birds the colour of sulphur, and horrible intestines 
hanging from the doors of the houses which I hate, 
there are forgotten sets of teeth in a coffee-pot, 
there are mirrors 
which should have wept with shame and horror, 
there are umbrellas all over the place, and poisons, and navels.

I stride along with calm, with eyes, with shoes, 
with fury, with forgetfuless, 
I pass, I cross offices and stores full of orthopedic appliances, 
and courtyards hung with clothes on wires, 
underpants, towels and shirts which weep 
slow dirty tears.

 

And How Long?

How much does a man live, after all?

Does he live a thousand days, or one only?

For a week, or for several centuries?

How long does a man spend dying?

What does it mean to say 'for ever'?

Lost in this preoccupation, 
I set myself to clear things up.

I sought out knowledgable priests, 
I waited for them after their rituals, 
I watched them when they went their ways 
to visit God and the Devil.

They wearied of my questions. 
They on their part knew very little. 
They were no more than administrators.

Medical men received me 
in between consultations, 
a scalpel in each hand, 
saturated in aureomycin, 
busier each day. 
As far as I could tell from their talk, 
the problem was as follows: 
it was not so much the death of a microbe-- 
they went down by the ton, 
but the few which survived 
showed signs of perversity.

They left me so startled 
that I sought out the grave-diggers. 
I went to the rivers where they burn 
enormous painted corpses, 
tiny bony bodies, 
emperors with an aura 
of terrible curses, 
women snuffed out at a stroke 
by a wave of cholera. 
There were whole beaches of dead 
and ashy specialists.

When I got the chance 
I asked them a slew of questions. 
They offered to burn me. 
It was all they knew.

In my own country the dead 
answered me, between drinks: 
'Get yourself a good woman 
and give up this nonsense.'

I never saw people so happy.

Raising their glasses they sang 
toasting health and death. 
They were huge fornicators.

I returned home, much older 
after crossing the world.

Now I ask questions of nobody,

But I know less every day. 
  
 

Tonight I Can Write

Tonight I can write the saddest lines.

Write, for example, 'The night is starry
and the stars are blue and shiver in the distance.'

The night wind revolves in the sky and sings.

Tonight I can write the saddest lines.
I loved her, and sometimes she loved me too.

Through nights like this one I held her in my arms.
I kissed her again and again under the endless sky.

She loved me, sometimes I loved her too.
How could one not have loved her great still eyes.

Tonight I can write the saddest lines.
To think that I do not have her. To feel that I have lost her.

To hear the immense night, still more immense without her.
And the verse falls to the soul like dew to the pasture.

What does it matter that my love could not keep her.
The night is starry and she is not with me.

This is all. In the distance someone is singing. In the distance.
My soul is not satisfied that it has lost her.

My sight tries to find her as though to bring her closer.
My heart looks for her, and she is not with me.

The same night whitening the same trees.
We, of that time, are no longer the same.

I no longer love her, that's certain, but how I loved her.
My voice tried to find the wind to touch her hearing.

Another's. She will be another's. As she was before my kisses.
Her voice, her bright body. Her infinite eyes.

I no longer love her, that's certain, but maybe I love her.
Love is so short, forgetting is so long.

Because through nights like this one I held her in my arms
my soul is not satisfied that it has lost her.

Though this be the last pain that she makes me suffer
and these the last verses that I write for her.


Ode To The Lemon
From blossoms
released
by the moonlight,
from an
aroma of exasperated
love,
steeped in fragrance,
yellowness
drifted from the lemon tree,
and from its plantarium
lemons descended to the earth.

Tender yield!
The coasts,
the markets glowed
with light, with
unrefined gold;
we opened
two halves
of a miracle,
congealed acid
trickled
from the hemispheres
of a star,
the most intense liqueur
of nature,
unique, vivid,
concentrated,
born of the cool, fresh
lemon,
of its fragrant house,
its acid, secret symmetry.

Knives
sliced a small
cathedral
in the lemon,
the concealed apse, opened,
revealed acid stained glass,
drops
oozed topaz,
altars,
cool architecture.

So, when you hold
the hemisphere
of a cut lemon
above your plate,
you spill
a universe of gold,
a
yellow goblet
of miracles,
a fragrant nipple
of the earth's breast,
a ray of light that was made fruit,
the minute fire of a planet.


Shirt

The back, the yoke, the yardage. Lapped seams,
The nearly invisible stitches along the collar
Turned in a sweatshop by Koreans or Malaysians

Gossiping over tea and noodles on their break
Or talking money or politics while one fitted
This armpiece with its overseam to the band

Of cuff I button at my wrist. The presser, the cutter,
The wringer, the mangle. The needle, the union,
The treadle, the bobbin. The code. The infamous blaze

At the Triangle Factory in nineteen-eleven.
One hundred and forty-six died in the flames
On the ninth floor, no hydrants, no fire escapes—

The witness in a building across the street
Who watched how a young man helped a girl to step
Up to the windowsill, then held her out

Away from the masonry wall and let her drop.
And then another. As if he were helping them up
To enter a streetcar, and not eternity.

A third before he dropped her put her arms
Around his neck and kissed him. Then he held
Her into space, and dropped her. Almost at once

He stepped up to the sill himself, his jacket flared
And fluttered up from his shirt as he came down,
Air filling up the legs of his gray trousers—

Like Hart Crane's Bedlamite, "shrill shirt ballooning."
Wonderful how the pattern matches perfectly
Across the placket and over the twin bar-tacked

Corners of both pockets, like a strict rhyme
Or a major chord. Prints, plaids, checks,
Houndstooth, Tattersall, Madras. The clan tartans

Invented by mill-owners inspired by the hoax of Ossian,
To control their savage Scottish workers, tamed
By a fabricated heraldry: MacGregor,

Bailey, MacMartin. The kilt, devised for workers
to wear among the dusty clattering looms.
Weavers, carders, spinners. The loader,

The docker, the navvy. The planter, the picker, the sorter
Sweating at her machine in a litter of cotton
As slaves in calico headrags sweated in fields:

George Herbert, your descendant is a Black
Lady in South Carolina, her name is Irma
And she inspected my shirt. Its color and fit

And feel and its clean smell have satisfied
both her and me. We have culled its cost and quality
Down to the buttons of simulated bone,

The buttonholes, the sizing, the facing, the characters
Printed in black on neckband and tail. The shape,
The label, the labor, the color, the shade. The shirt.

 
The Pleasures of the Door

 

 

Kings do not touch doors.

            They know nothing of this pleasure: pushing before one gently or brusquely one of those large familiar panels, then turning back to replace it—holding a door in one’s arms.

            …The pleasure of grabbing the midriff of one of these tall obstacles to a room by its porcelain node; that short clinch during which movement stops, the eye widens, and the whole body adjusts to its new surrounding.

            With a friendly hand one still holds on to it, before closing it decisively and shutting oneself in—which the click of the tight but well-oiled spring pleasantly confirms.

 

 

 

 

Water

 

            Below me, always below me is water.  Always with lowered eye do I look at it.  It is like the ground, like a part of the ground, a modification of the ground.

            It is bright and brilliant, formless and fresh, passive yet persistent in its one vice, gravity; disposing of extraordinary means to satisfy that vice—twisting, piercing, eroding, filtering.

            This vice works from within as well: water collapses all the time, constantly sacrifices all form, tends only to humble itself, flattens itself on the ground, like a corpse, like the monks of certain orders.  Always lower—that could be its motto; the opposite of excelsior.

 

*

            One might almost say that water is mad, because of its hysterical need to obey gravity alone, a need that possesses it like an obsession.

            Of course, everything in the world responds to this need, which always and everywhere must be satisfied.  This cabinet, for example, proves to be terribly stubborn in its desire to stay on the ground, and if one day it found itself badly balanced, would sooner fall to pieces than run counter to that desire.But to a certain degree it teases gravity, defies it; does not give way in all its parts: its cornice, its moldings do not give in. Inherent in the cabinet is a resistance that benefits its personality and form.

            LIQUID, by definition, is that which chooses to obey gravity rather than maintain its form, which rejects all form in order to obey gravity—and which loses all dignity because of that obsession, that pathological anxiety.  Because of that vice—which makes it fast, flowing, or stagnant, formless or fearsome, formless and fearsome, piercingly fearsome in cases; devious, filtering, winding—one can do anything one wants with it, even lead water through pipes to make it spout out vertically so as to enjoy the way it collapses in droplets:  a real slave.

            The sun and the moon, however, are envious of this exclusive influence, and try to take over whenever water happens to offer the opening of great expanses, and above all when in a state of least resistance—spread out in shallow puddles.  Then the sun exacts an even greater tribute: forces it into a perpetual cycle, treats it like a gerbil on a wheel.

 

*

 

            Water eludes me…slips between my fingers.  And even so! It’s not even that clean (like a lizard or a frog): it leaves traces, spots, on my hands that are quite slow to dry or have to be wiped. Water escapes me yet marks me, and there is not a thing I can do about it.

            Ideologically it’s the same thing: it eludes me, eludes all definition, but in my mind and on this sheet leaves traces, formless marks.

 

*

 

            Water’s instability: sensitive to the slightest change of level.  Running down stairs two at a time.  Playful, childishly obedient, returning as soon as called if one alters the slope on this side.

 

 

 

 

The Horse

 

        Many times the size of a man, the horse has flaring nostrils, round eyes under half-closed lids, cocked ears and long muscular neck.

            The tallest of man’s domestic animals, and truly his designated mount.

            Man, somewhat lost on an elephant, is at his best on a horse, truly a throne to his measure.

            We will not do away with the horse, I hope?

            He will not become a curiosity in a zoo?

           …Already now, in town, he is no more than a miserable substitute for the automobile, the most miserable means of traction.

            Ah, the horse is also—does man suspect it?—something else besides! He is impatience nostrilized.

            His weapons are running, biting, bucking.

            He seems to have a keen nose, keen ears, and very sensitive eyes.

            The greatest tribute one can pay him is having to fit him with blinders.

            But no weapon…
            Whereby the temptation to add one.  One only.  A horn.  Thereby the unicorn.

 

            The horse, terribly nervous, is aerophagous.

            Hypersensitive, he clamps his jaws, holds his breath, then releases it, making the walls of his nasal cavities vibrate loudly.

            That is why this noble beast, who feeds on air and grass alone, produces only straw turds and thunderous fragrant farts.

            Fragrant thunderisms.

 

            What am I saying, feeds on air?  Gets drunk on it.  Sniffs it, savors it, snorts it.

            He rushes into it, shakes his mane in it, kicks up his hind legs in it.

            He would evidently like to fly up into it.

            The flight of clouds inspires him, urges him to imitation.

            He does imitate it: he tosses, prances…

            And when the whip’s lightning claps, the clouds gallop faster and rain tramples the earth…

 

            Out of your stall, high-spirited over-sensitive armoire, all polished and smoothed!

            Great beautiful period piece!

            Polished ebony or mahogany.

            Stroke the withers of this armoire and immediately it has a faraway look.

            Dust cloth at the lips,feather mop at the rump, key in the lock of the nostrils.

 

            His skin quivers, irritably tolerating flies, his shoe hammers the ground.

            He lowers his head, leans his muzzle toward the ground and consoles himself with grass.

            A stepstool is needed to look on the upper shelf.

            Ticklish skin, as I was saying…but his natural impatience is so profound, that inside his body the parts of his skeleton behave like pebbles in a torrent!

 

            Seen from the apse, the highest animal nave in the stable…

 

            Great saint! Great horse! Beautiful behind in the stable…

            What is this splendid courtesan’s behind that greets me, set on slim legs, high heels?

            Giant goose of the golden eggs, strangely clipped.

            Ah, it is the smell of gold that assails my nostrils!

            Leather and manure mixed together.

            Strong-smelling omelette, from the goose of the golden eggs.

            Straw omelette, earth omelette, flavored with the rum of your urine, dropping from the crack under your tail…

            As though fresh from the oven, on a pastry sheet, the stable’s rolls and rum balls.

            Great saint, with your Byzantine eyes, woeful, under the harness…

 

            A sort of saint, humble monk at prayer, in the twilight.

            A monk?  What am I saying?…A pontiff, on his excremental palanquin! A pope—exhibiting to all comers a splendid courtesan’s behind, generously heart-shaped, on slender legs ending elegantly in high-heeled shoes.

            WHAT IS THIS CLACKING OF THE BIT?

            THESE DULL THUDS IN THE STALL?

            WHAT’S GOING ON?

            PONTIFF AT PRAYER?

            SCHOOLBOY IN DETENTION?

            GREAT SAINTS! GREAT HORSES (HORSES OR HEROES?), OF THE BEAUTIFUL BEHIND IN THE STABLE,

WHY, SAINTLY MONK, ARE YOU WEARING RIDING BREECHES?

—INTERRUPTED DURING HIS MASS, HE TURNED HIS BYZATINE EYES TOWARD US…



“the withness of the body” –Whitehead

The heavy bear who goes with me,
A manifold honey to smear his face,
Clumsy and lumbering here and there,
The central ton of every place,
The hungry beating brutish one
In love with candy, anger, and sleep,
Crazy factotum, disheveling all,
Climbs the building, kicks the football,
Boxes his brother in the hate-ridden city.

Breathing at my side, that heavy animal,
That heavy bear who sleeps with me,
Howls in his sleep for a world of sugar,
A sweetness intimate as the water’s clasp,
Howls in his sleep because the tight-rope
Trembles and shows the darkness beneath.
–The strutting show-off is terrified,
Dressed in his dress-suit, bulging his pants,
Trembles to think that his quivering meat
Must finally wince to nothing at all.

That inescapable animal walks with me,
Has followed me since the black womb held,
Moves where I move, distorting my gesture,
A caricature, a swollen shadow,
A stupid clown of the spirit’s motive,
Perplexes and affronts with his own darkness,
The secret life of belly and bone,
Opaque, too near, my private, yet unknown,
Stretches to embrace the very dear
With whom I would walk without him near,
Touches her grossly, although a word
Would bare my heart and make me clear,
Stumbles, flounders, and strives to be fed
Dragging me with him in his mouthing care,
Amid the hundred million of his kind,
The scrimmage of appetite everywhere.


Fork

This strange thing must have crept 
Right out of hell. 
It resembles a bird's foot 
Worn around the cannibal's neck. 
As you hold it in your hand, 
As you stab with it into a piece of meat, 
It is possible to imagine the rest of the bird: 
Its head which like your fist 
Is large, bald, beakless and blind. 
 

Animal Acts

A bear who eats with a silver spoon. 
Two apes adept at grave-digging. 
Rats who do calculus. 
A police dog who copulates with a woman, 
Who takes undertaker's measurements.

A bedbug who suffers, who has doubts 
About his existence.  The miraculous 
Laughing dove.  A thousand-year-old turtle 
Playing billiards.  A chicken who 
Cuts his own throat, who bleeds.

The trainer with his sugar-cubes, 
With his chair and whip.  The evenings 
When they all huddle in a cage, 
Smoking cheap cigars, lazily 
Marking the cards in the new deck. 
 

Harsh Climate

The brain itself in its skull 
Is very cold, 
According to 
Albertus Magnus.

Something like a stretch of tundra 
On the scale of the universe. 
Galactic wind. 
Lofty icebergs in the distance.

Polar night. 
A large ocean liner caught in the ice. 
A few lights still burning on the deck. 
Silence and fierce cold. 
 

Bestiary for the Fingers of My Right Hand

1. 
Thumb, loose tooth of a horse. 
Rooster to his hens. 
Horn of a devil.  Fat worm 
They have attached to my flesh 
At the time of my birth. 
It takes four to hold him down, 
Bend him in half, until the bone 
Begins to whimper. 
Cut him off.  He can take care 
Of himself.  Take root in the earth, 
Or go hunting with wolves.

2. 
The second points the way. 
True way.  The path crosses the earth, 
The moon and some stars. 
Watch, he points further. 
He points to himself.

3. 
The middle one has backache. 
Stiff, still unaccustomed to this life: 
An old man at birth.  It's about something 
That he had and lost, 
That he looks for within my hand, 
The way a dog looks 
For fleas 
With a sharp tooth.

4. 
The fourth is mystery. 
Sometimes as my hand 
Rests on the table 
He jumps by himself 
As though someone called his name.

After each bone, finger, 
I come to him, troubled.

5. 
Something stirs in the fifth 
Something perpetually at the point 
Of birth.  Weak and submissive, 
His touch is gentle. 
It weighs a tear. 
It takes the mote out of the eye.


Riprap

Lay down these words
Before your mind like rocks.
             placed solid, by hands   
In choice of place, set
Before the body of the mind
             in space and time:
Solidity of bark, leaf, or wall
             riprap of things:
Cobble of milky way,
             straying planets,
These poems, people,
             lost ponies with
Dragging saddles—
             and rocky sure-foot trails.   
The worlds like an endless   
             four-dimensional
Game of Go.
             ants and pebbles
In the thin loam, each rock a word   
             a creek-washed stone
Granite: ingrained
             with torment of fire and weight   
Crystal and sediment linked hot
             all change, in thoughts,   
As well as things.
 

 

 

Above Pate Valley

We finished clearing the last   
Section of trail by noon,
High on the ridge-side
Two thousand feet above the creek   
Reached the pass, went on
Beyond the white pine groves,   
Granite shoulders, to a small
Green meadow watered by the snow,   
Edged with Aspen—sun
Straight high and blazing
But the air was cool.
Ate a cold fried trout in the   
Trembling shadows. I spied
A glitter, and found a flake
Black volcanic glass—obsidian—
By a flower. Hands and knees   
Pushing the Bear grass, thousands   
Of arrowhead leavings over a   
Hundred yards. Not one good   
Head, just razor flakes
On a hill snowed all but summer,   
A land of fat summer deer,
They came to camp. On their   
Own trails. I followed my own   
Trail here. Picked up the cold-drill,   
Pick, singlejack, and sack
Of dynamite.
Ten thousand years.
 

Mid-August at Sourdough Mountain Lookout

Down valley a smoke haze
Three days heat, after five days rain   
Pitch glows on the fir-cones
Across rocks and meadows
Swarms of new flies.
 
I cannot remember things I once read   
A few friends, but they are in cities.   
Drinking cold snow-water from a tin cup   
Looking down for miles
Through high still air.
 

 

How Poetry Comes to Me

It comes blundering over the
Boulders at night, it stays
Frightened outside the
Range of my campfire
I go to meet it at the
Edge of the light

Online Source


For All

Ah to be alive
on a mid-September morn
fording a stream
barefoot, pants rolled up,
holding boots, pack on,
sunshine, ice in the shallows,
northern rockies.

Rustle and shimmer of icy creek waters
stones turn underfoot, small and hard as toes
cold nose dripping
singing inside
creek music, heart music,
smell of sun on gravel.

I pledge allegiance

I pledge allegiance to the soil
of Turtle Island,
and to the beings who thereon dwell
one ecosystem
in diversity
under the sun
With joyful interpenetration for all.

Online Source

On Top

All this new stuff goes on top
turn it over, turn it over
wait and water down
from the dark bottom
turn it inside out
let it spread through
Sift down even.
Watch it sprout.

A mind like compost.

Online Source

Hay for the Horses

He had driven half the night
From far down San Joaquin
Through Mariposa, up the
Dangerous Mountain roads,
And pulled in at eight a.m.
With his big truckload of hay
            behind the barn.
With winch and ropes and hooks
We stacked the bales up clean
To splintery redwood rafters
High in the dark, flecks of alfalfa
Whirling through shingle-cracks of light,
Itch of haydust in the 
            sweaty shirt and shoes.
At lunchtime under Black oak
Out in the hot corral,
---The old mare nosing lunchpails,
Grasshoppers crackling in the weeds---
"I'm sixty-eight" he said,
"I first bucked hay when I was seventeen.
I thought, that day I started,
I sure would hate to do this all my life.
And dammit, that's just what
I've gone and done."

From Riprap and Cold Mountain Poems by Gary Snyder, published by North Point Press. Copyright © 1958,
1959, 1965 Gary Snyder. Online Source

Old Bones

Out there walking round, looking out for food,
a rootstock, a birdcall, a seed that you can crack
plucking, digging, snaring, snagging,
        barely getting by, 

no food out there on dusty slopes of scree—
carry some—look for some,
go for a hungry dream.
Deer bone, Dall sheep,
        bones hunger home. 

Out there somewhere
a shrine for the old ones,
the dust of the old bones,
        old songs and tales. 

What we ate—who ate what—
        how we all prevailed.

from Mountains and Rivers Without End, published by Counterpoint Press, 1996. Online Source

Kisiabaton

Beat-up datsun idling in the road
shreds of fog
almost-vertical hillsides drop away
huge stumps fading into mist
soft warm rain

Snaggy, forked and spreading tops, a temperate cloud-forest tree

Chamaecyparis formosiana--
Taiwan hinoki,
hung-kuai     red cypress

That the tribal people call kisiabaton

this rare old tree
is what we came to see.

from No Nature by Gary Snyder. Copyright© 1992 by Gary Snyder. Online Source

At Tower Peak

Every tan rolling meadow will turn into housing
Freeways are clogged all day
Academies packed with scholars writing papers
City people lean and dark
This land most real 
As its western-tending golden slopes
And bird-entangled central valley swamps
Sea-lion, urchin coasts
Southerly salmon-probes 
Into the aromatic almost-Mexican hills
Along a range of granite peaks
The names forgotten,
An eastward running river that ends out in desert
The chipping ground-squirrels in the tumbled blocks
The gloss of glacier ghost on slab
Where we wake refreshed from ten hours sleep
After a long day's walking
Packing burdens to the snow
Wake to the same old world of no names,
No things, new as ever, rock and water,
Cool dawn birdcalls, high jet contrails.
A day or two or million, breathing
A few steps back from what goes down
In the current realm.
A kind of ice age, spreading, filling valleys
Shaving soils, paving fields, you can walk in it
Live in it, drive through it then 
It melts away
For whatever sprouts
After the age of
Frozen hearts. Flesh-carved rock
And gusts on the summit,
Smoke from forest fires is white,
The haze above the distant valley like a dusk.
It's just one world, this spine of rock and streams
And snow, and the wash of gravels, silts
Sands, bunchgrasses, saltbrush, bee-fields,
Twenty million human people, downstream, here below.

from No Nature by Gary Snyder. Copyright© 1992 by Gary Snyder. Online Source

Smokey the Bear Sutra

Once in the Jurassic about 150 million years ago,
the Great Sun Buddha in this corner of the Infinite
Void gave a Discourse to all the assembled elements
and energies: to the standing beings, the walking beings,
the flying beings, and the sitting beings -- even grasses,
to the number of thirteen billion, each one born from a
seed, assembled there: a Discourse concerning
Enlightenment on the planet Earth. 

"In some future time, there will be a continent called
America. It will have great centers of power called
such as Pyramid Lake, Walden Pond, Mt. Rainier, Big Sur,
Everglades, and so forth; and powerful nerves and channels
such as Columbia River, Mississippi River, and Grand Canyon
The human race in that era will get into troubles all over
its head, and practically wreck everything in spite of
its own strong intelligent Buddha-nature." 

"The twisting strata of the great mountains and the pulsings
of volcanoes are my love burning deep in the earth.
My obstinate compassion is schist and basalt and
granite, to be mountains, to bring down the rain. In that
future American Era I shall enter a new form; to cure
the world of loveless knowledge that seeks with blind hunger:
and mindless rage eating food that will not fill it." 

And he showed himself in his true form of

SMOKEY THE BEAR

·        A handsome smokey-colored brown bear standing on his hind legs, showing that he is aroused and
watchful.

·        Bearing in his right paw the Shovel that digs to the truth beneath appearances; cuts the roots of useless
attachments, and flings damp sand on the fires of greed and war;

·        His left paw in the Mudra of Comradely Display -- indicating that all creatures have the full right to live to their limits and that deer, rabbits, chipmunks, snakes, dandelions, and lizards all grow in the realm of the Dharma;

·        Wearing the blue work overalls symbolic of slaves and laborers, the countless men oppressed by a
civilization that claims to save but often destroys;

·        Wearing the broad-brimmed hat of the West, symbolic of the forces that guard the Wilderness, which is the Natural State of the Dharma and the True Path of man on earth: all true paths lead through mountains --

·        With a halo of smoke and flame behind, the forest fires of the kali-yuga, fires caused by the stupidity of
those who think things can be gained and lost whereas in truth all is contained vast and free in the Blue Sky and Green Earth of One Mind;

·        Round-bellied to show his kind nature and that the great earth has food enough for everyone who loves her and trusts her;

·        Trampling underfoot wasteful freeways and needless suburbs; smashing the worms of capitalism and
totalitarianism;

·        Indicating the Task: his followers, becoming free of cars, houses, canned foods, universities, and shoes;
master the Three Mysteries of their own Body, Speech, and Mind; and fearlessly chop down the rotten
trees and prune out the sick limbs of this country America and then burn the leftover trash.

Wrathful but Calm. Austere but Comic. Smokey the Bear will
Illuminate those who would help him; but for those who would hinder or
slander him,

HE WILL PUT THEM OUT.

Thus his great Mantra:

Namah samanta vajranam chanda maharoshana
Sphataya hum traka ham nam

"I DEDICATE MYSELF TO THE UNIVERSAL DIAMOND
BE THIS RAGING FURY DESTROYED"

And he will protect those who love woods and rivers,
Gods and animals, hobos and madmen, prisoners and sick
people, musicians, playful women, and hopeful children: 

And if anyone is threatened by advertising, air pollution, television,
or the police, they should chant SMOKEY THE BEAR'S WAR SPELL:

DROWN THEIR BUTTS
CRUSH THEIR BUTTS
DROWN THEIR BUTTS
CRUSH THEIR BUTTS

And SMOKEY THE BEAR will surely appear to put the enemy out
with his vajra-shovel.

·        Now those who recite this Sutra and then try to put it in practice will accumulate merit as countless as the sands of Arizona and Nevada.

·        Will help save the planet Earth from total oil slick.

·        Will enter the age of harmony of man and nature.

·        Will win the tender love and caresses of men, women, and beasts.

·        Will always have ripe blackberries to eat and a sunny spot under a pine tree to sit at.

·        AND IN THE END WILL WIN HIGHEST PERFECT ENLIGHTENMENT. 

thus have we heard. 

(may be reproduced free forever)

from Myths and Texts

Felix Baran
Hugo Gerlot
Gustav Johnson
John Looney
Abraham Rabinowitz
Shot down on the steamer Verona
For the shingle-weavers of Everett
the Everett Massacre November 5 1916

Ed McCullough, a logger for thirty-five years
Reduced by the advent of chainsaws
To chopping off knots at the landing:
"I don't have to take this kind of shit,
Another twenty years
and I'll tell 'em to shove it"
(he was sixty-five then)
In 1934 they lived in shanties
At Hooverville, Sullivan's Gulch.
When the Portland-bound train came through
The trainmen tossed off coal.

"Thousands of boys shot and beat up
For wanting a good bed, good pay,
decent food, in the woods -- "
No one knew what it meant:
"Soldiers of Discontent."



Ellen West 
I love sweets,—
                              heaven
would be dying on a bed of vanilla ice cream . . .
 
But my true self
is thin, all profile
 
and effortless gestures, the sort of blond
elegant girl whose
                                body is the image of her soul.
 
—My doctors tell me I must give up
this ideal;
                 but I
WILL NOT . . . cannot.
 
Only to my husband I'm not simply a "case."
 
But he is a fool. He married
meat, and thought it was a wife.
 
* * *
 
Why am I a girl?
 
I ask my doctors, and they tell me they
don't know, that it is just "given."
 
But it has such
implications—;
                            and sometimes,
I even feel like a girl.
 
* * *
 
Now, at the beginning of Ellen's thirty-second year, her
physical condition has deteriorated still further. Her use
of laxatives increases beyond measure. Every evening she
takes sixty to seventy tablets of a laxative, with the result
that she suffers tortured vomiting at night and violent
diarrhea by day, often accompanied by a weakness of the
heart. She has thinned down to a skeleton, and weighs
only 92 pounds.
 
* * *
 
About five years ago, I was in a restaurant,
eating alone
                           with a book. I was
not married, and often did that . . .
 
—I'd turn down
dinner invitations, so I could eat alone;
 
I'd allow myself two pieces of bread, with
butter, at the beginning, and three scoops of
vanilla ice cream, at the end,—
 
                                                     sitting there alone
 
with a book, both in the book
and out of it, waited on, idly
watching people,—
 
                                    when an attractive young man
and woman, both elegantly dressed,
sat next to me.
 
                            She was beautiful—;
 
with sharp, clear features, a good
bone structure—;
                               if she took her make-up off
in front of you, rubbing cold cream
again and again across her skin, she still would be
beautiful—
                   more beautiful.
 
And he,—
                   I couldn't remember when I had seen a man
so attractive. I didn't know why. He was almost
 
a male version
                             of her,—
 
I had the sudden, mad notion that I
wanted to be his lover . . .
 
—Were they married?
                                      were they lovers?
 
They didn't wear wedding rings.
 
Their behavior was circumspect. They discussed
politics. They didn't touch . . .
 
—How could I discover?
 
                                                Then, when the first course
arrived, I noticed the way
 
each held his fork out for the other
 
to taste what he had ordered . . .
 
                                                                 They did this
again and again, with pleased looks, indulgent
smiles, for each course,
                                     more than once for each dish—;
much too much for just friends . . .
 
—Their behavior somehow sickened me;
 
the way each gladly
put the food the other had offered into his mouth—;
 
I knew what they were. I knew they slept together.
 
An immense depression came over me . . .
 
—I knew I could never
with such ease allow another to put food into my mouth:
 
happily myself put food into another's mouth—;
 
I knew that to become a wife I would have to give up my ideal.
 
* * *
 
Even as a child,
I saw that the "natural" process of aging
 
is for one's middle to thicken—
one's skin to blotch;
 
as happened to my mother.
And her mother.
                            I loathed "Nature."
 
At twelve, pancakes
became the most terrible thought there is. . .
 
I shall defeat "Nature."
 
In the hospital, when they
weigh me, I wear weights secretly sewn into my belt.
 
* * *
 
January 16. The patient is allowed to eat in her room, but comes
readily with her husband to afternoon coffee. Previously she had
stoutly resisted this on the ground that she did not really eat but
devoured like a wild animal. This she demonstrated with utmost
realism . . . . Her physical examination showed nothing striking.
Salivary-glands are markedly enlarged on both sides.
January 21. Has been reading Faust again. In her diary,
writes that art is the "mutual permeation" of the "world of the
body" and the "world of the spirit." Says that her own poems
are "hospital poems . . . weak—without skill or perseverance;
only managing to beat their wings softly."
February 8. Agitation, quickly subsided again. Has
attached herself to an elegant, very thin female patient. Homo-
erotic component strikingly evident.
February 15. Vexation, and torment. Says that her mind
forces her always to think of eating. Feels herself degraded by
this. Has entirely, for the first time in years, stopped writing poetry.
 
* * *
 
Callas is my favorite singer, but I've only
seen her once—;
 
I've never forgotten that night. . .
 
—It was in Tosca, she had long before
lost weight, her voice
had been, for years,
                                  deteriorating, half itself. . .
 
When her career began, of course, she was fat,
 
enormous—; in the early photographs,
sometimes I almost don't recognize her. . .
 
The voice too then was enormous—
 
healthy; robust; subtle; but capable of
crude effects, even vulgar,
                                             almost out of
high spirits, too much health. . .
 
But soon she felt that she must lose weight,—
that all she was trying to express
 
was obliterated by her body,
buried in flesh—;
                               abruptly, within
four months, she lost at least sixty pounds. . .
 
—The gossip in Milan was that Callas
had swallowed a tapeworm.
 
But of course she hadn't.
 
                                            The tapeworm
was her soul. . .
 
—How her soul, uncompromising,
insatiable,
                    must have loved eating the flesh from her bones,
 
revealing this extraordinarily
mercurial; fragile; masterly creature. . .
 
—But irresistibly, nothing
stopped there; the huge voice
 
also began to change: at first, it simply diminished
in volume, in size,
                                  then the top notes became
shrill, unreliable—at last,
usually not there at all. . .
 
—No one knows why. Perhaps her mind,
ravenous, still insatiable, sensed
 
that to struggle with the shreds of a voice
 
must make her artistry subtler, more refined,
more capable of expressing humiliation,
rage, betrayal. . .
 
—Perhaps the opposite. Perhaps her spirit
loathed the unending struggle
 
to embody itself, to manifest itself, on a stage whose
 
mechanics, and suffocating customs,
seemed expressly designed to annihilate spirit. . .
 
—I know that in Tosca, in the second act,
when, humiliated, hounded by Scarpia,
she sang Vissi d'arte
                                      —"I lived for art"—
 
and in torment, bewilderment, at the end she asks,
with a voice reaching
                                      harrowingly for the notes,
 
"Art has repaid me LIKE THIS?"
 
                                                           I felt I was watching
autobiography—
                              an art; skill;
virtuosity
 
miles distant from the usual soprano's
athleticism,—
                         the usual musician's dream
of virtuosity without content. . .
 
—I wonder what she feels, now,
listening to her recordings.
 
For they have already, within a few years,
begun to date. . .
 
Whatever they express
they express through the style of a decade
and a half—;
                         a style she helped create. . .
 
—She must know that now
she probably would not do a trill in
exactly that way,—
                                   that the whole sound, atmosphere,
dramaturgy of her recordings
 
have just slightly become those of the past. . .
 
—Is it bitter? Does her soul
tell her
 
that she was an idiot ever to think
anything
                material wholly could satisfy?. . .
 
—Perhaps it says: The only way
to escape
the History of Styles
 
is not to have a body.
 
* * *
 
When I open my eyes in the morning, my great
mystery
             stands before me . . .
 
—I know that I am intelligent; therefore
 
the inability not to fear food
day-and-night; this unending hunger
ten minutes after I have eaten . . .
                                                          a childish
dread of eating; hunger which can have no cause,—
 
half my mind says that all this
is demeaning . . .
 
                                 Bread
 
for days on end
drives all real thought from my brain . . .
 
—Then I think, No. The ideal of being thin
 
conceals the ideal
not to have a body—;
                                     which is NOT trivial . . .
 
This wish seems now as much a "given" of my existence
 
as the intolerable
fact that I am dark-complexioned; big-boned;
and once weighed
one hundred and sixty-five pounds . . .
 
—But then I think, No. That's too simple,—
 
without a body, who can
know himself at all?
                                   Only by
acting; choosing; rejecting; have I
made myself—
                         discovered who and what Ellen can be . . .
 
—But then again I think, NO. This I is anterior
 
to name; gender; action;
fashion;
                MATTER ITSELF,—
 
. . . trying to stop my hunger with FOOD
is like trying to appease thirst
                                                   with ink.
 
* * *
 
March 30. Result of the consultation: Both gentlemen agree
completely with my prognosis and doubt any therapeutic
usefulness of commitment even more emphatically than I.
All three of us are agreed that it is not a case of obsessional
neurosis and not one of manic-depressive psychosis, and that
no definitely reliable therapy is possible. We therefore resolved
to give in to the patient's demand for discharge.
 
* * *
 
The train-ride yesterday
was far worse than I expected . . .
 
                                                         In our compartment
 
were ordinary people: a student;
a woman; her child;—
 
they had ordinary bodies, pleasant faces;
                                                                            but I thought
 
I was surrounded by creatures
 
with the pathetic, desperate
desire to be not what they were:—
 
the student was short,
and carried his body as if forcing
it to be taller—;
 
the woman showed her gums when she smiled,
and often held her
hand up to hide them—;
 
the child
seemed to cry simply because it was
small; a dwarf, and helpless . . .
 
—I was hungry. I had insisted that my husband
not bring food . . .
 
After about thirty minutes, the woman
peeled an orange
 
to quiet the child. She put a section
into its mouth—;
                               immediately it spit it out.
 
The piece fell to the floor.
 
—She pushed it with her foot through the dirt
toward me
several inches.
 
My husband saw me staring
down at the piece . . .
 
—I didn't move; how I wanted
to reach out,
                        and as if invisible
 
shove it in my mouth—;
 
my body
became rigid. As I stared at him,
I could see him staring
 
at me,—
                then he looked at the student—; at the woman—; then
back to me . . .
 
I didn't move.
 
—At last, he bent down, and
casually
               threw it out the window.
 
He looked away.
 
—I got up to leave the compartment, then
saw his face,—
 
his eyes
were red;
                and I saw
 
—I'm sure I saw—
 
disappointment.
 
* * *
 
At breakfast she eats butter and sugar, at noon she eats
so much that—for the first time in thirteen years!—she is
satisfied by her food and gets really full. At afternoon
coffee she eats chocolate creams and Easter eggs. She
takes a walk with her husband, reads poems, listens to
recordings, is in a positively festive mood, and all heavi-
ness seems to have fallen away from her. She writes
letters, the last one a letter to the fellow patient here to
whom she had become so attached. In the evening she
takes a lethal dose of poison, and on the following morn-
ing she is dead. "She looked as she had never looked in
life—calm and happy and peaceful."
 
* * *
 
Dearest.—I remember how
at eighteen,
                     on hikes with friends, when
they rested, sitting down to joke or talk,
 
I circled
around them, afraid to hike ahead alone,
 
yet afraid to rest
when I was not yet truly thin.
 
You and, yes, my husband,—
you and he
 
have by degrees drawn me within the circle;
forced me to sit down at last on the ground.
 
I am grateful.
 
But something in me refuses it.
 
—How eager I have been
to compromise, to kill this refuser,—
 
but each compromise, each attempt
to poison an ideal
which often seemed to me sterile and unreal,
 
heightens my hunger.
 
I am crippled. I disappoint you.
 
Will you greet with anger, or
happiness,
 
the news which might well reach you
before this letter?
 
Your Ellen.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Herbert White 
"When I hit her on the head, it was good,

and then I did it to her a couple of times,--
but it was funny,--afterwards,
it was as if somebody else did it ...

Everything flat, without sharpness, richness or line.

Still, I liked to drive past the woods where she lay,
tell the old lady and the kids I had to take a piss,
hop out and do it to her ...

The whole buggy of them waiting for me
made me feel good;
but still, just like I knew all along,
she didn't move.

When the body got too discomposed,
I'd just jack off, letting it fall on her ...

--It sounds crazy, but I tell you
sometimes it was beautiful--; I don't know how
to say it, but for a minute, everything was possible--;
and then,
then,--
well, like I said, she didn't move: and I saw,
under me, a little girl was just lying there in the mud:

and I knew I couldn't have done that,--
somebody else had to have done that,--
standing above her there,
in those ordinary, shitty leaves ...

--One time, I went to see Dad in a motel where he was
staying with a woman; but she was gone;
you could smell the wine in the air; and he started,
real embarrassing, to cry ...
He was still a little drunk,
and asked me to forgive him for
all he hasn't done--; but, What the shit?
Who would have wanted to stay with Mom? with bastards
not even his own kids?

I got in the truck, and started to drive
and saw a little girl--
who I picked up, hit on the head, and
screwed, and screwed, and screwed, and screwed, then

buried,
in the garden of the motel ...

--You see, ever since I was a kid I wanted
to feel things make sense: I remember

looking out the window of my room back home,--
and being almost suffocated by the asphalt;
and grass; and trees; and glass;
just there, just there, doing nothing!
not saying anything! filling me up--
but also being a wall; dead, and stopping me;
--how I wanted to see beneath it, cut

beneath it, and make it
somehow, come alive ...

The salt of the earth;
Mom once said, 'Man's spunk is the salt of the earth ...'

--That night, at that Twenty-nine Palms Motel
I had passed a million times on the road, everything

fit together; was alright;
it seemed like
everything had to be there, like I had spent years
trying, and at last finally finished drawing this
huge circle ...

--But then, suddenly I knew
somebody else did it, some bastard
had hurt a little girl--; the motel
I could see again, it had been
itself all the time, a lousy
pile of bricks, plaster, that didn't seem to
have to be there,--but was, just by chance ...

--Once, on the farm, when I was a kid,
I was screwing a goat; and the rope around his neck
when he tried to get away
pulled tight;--and just when I came,
he died ...
I came back the next day; jacked off over his body;
but it didn't do any good ...

Mom once said:
'Man's spunk is the salt of the earth, and grows kids.'

I tried so hard to come; more pain than anything else;
but didn't do any good ...

--About six months ago, I heard Dad remarried,
so I drove over to Connecticut to see him and see
if he was happy.
She was twenty-five years younger than him:
she had lots of little kids, and I don't know why,
I felt shaky ...

I stopped in front of the address; and
snuck up to the window to look in ...
--There he was, a kid
six months old on his lap, laughing
and bouncing the kid, happy in his old age
to play the papa after years of sleeping around,--
it twisted me up ...
To think that what he wouldn't give me,
he wanted to give them ...

I could have killed the bastard ...

--Naturally, I just got right back in the car,
and believe me, was determined, determined,
to head straight for home ...

but the more I drove,
I kept thinking about getting a girl,
and the more I thought I shouldn't do it,
the more I had to--

I saw her coming out of the movies,
saw she was alone, and
kept circling the blocks as she walked along them,
saying, 'You're going to leave her alone.'
'You're going to leave her alone.'

--The woods were scary!
As the seasons changed, and you saw more and more
of the skull show through, the nights became clearer,
and the buds,--erect, like nipples ...

--But then, one night,
nothing worked ...
Nothing in the sky
would blur like I wanted it to;
and I couldn't, couldn't,
get it to seem to me
that somebody else did it ...

I tried, and tried, but there was just me there,
and her, and the sharp trees
saying, "That's you standing there.
You're ...
just you."

I hope I fry.

--Hell came when I saw
MYSELF ...
and couldn't stand
what I see ..." 


The Wounded Breakfast

    A huge shoe mounts up from the horizon, squealing and grinding forward on small wheels, even as a man sitting to breakfast on his veranda is suddenly engulfed in a great shadow almost the size of the night. 
    He looks up and sees a huge shoe ponderously mounting out of the earth.  Up in the unlaced ankle-part an old woman stands at a helm behind the great tongue curled forward; the thick laces dragging like ships' rope on the ground as the huge thing squeals and grinds forward; children everywhere, they look from the shoelace holes, they crowd about the old woman, even as she pilots this huge shoe over the earth. . . 
    Soon the huge shoe is descending the opposite horizon, a monstrous snail squealing and grinding into the earth. . . 
    The man turns to his breakfast again, but sees it's been wounded, the yolk of one of his eggs is bleeding. . . 
  
 

The Automobile

A man had just married an automobile.

    But I mean to say, said his father, that the automobile is not a person because it is something different.

    For instance, compare it to your mother.  Do you see how it is different from your mother?  Somehow it seems wider, doesn't it?  And besides, your mother wears her hair differently.

    You ought to try to find something in the world that looks like mother.

    I have mother, isn't that enough that looks like mother?  Do I have to gather more mothers?

    They are all old ladies who do not in the least excite any wish to procreate, said the son.

    But you cannot procreate with an automobile, said father.

    The son shows father an ignition key.  See, here is a special penis which does with the automobile as the man with the woman; and the automobile gives birth to a place far from this place, dropping its puppy miles as it goes.

    Does that make me a grandfather? said father.

    That makes you where you are when I am far away, said the son.

    Father and mother watch an automobile with a just married sign on it growing smaller in a road. 
  
  
  
 

The Fall 
 

    There was a man who found two leaves and came indoors holding them out saying to his parents that he was a tree.

    To which they said then go into the yard and do not grow in the living-room as your roots may ruin the carpet.

    He said I was fooling I am not a tree and he dropped his leaves.

    But his parents said look it is fall. 
  
  
 

A Cottage in the Wood 
 

    He has built himself a cottage in a wood, near where the insect rubs its wings in song. 
    Yet, without measure, or proper sense of scale, he has made the cottage too small.  He realizes this when only his hand will fit through the door.  He tries the stairs to the second floor with his fingers, but his arm wedges in the entrance.  He wonders how he will cook his dinner.  He might get his hands through the kitchen window.  But even so, he will not be able to cook enough on such a tiny stove. 
    He shall also lie unsheltered in the night, even though a bed with its covers turned down waits for him in the cottage. 
    He lies down and curls himself around the cottage, listening to the insect that rubs its wings in song. 
  
  
 

The Broken Daughter 
 

    His daughter had broken.  He took her to be repaired. . .If you'll just pump-up her backside, and rewire her hair. . .

    This girl needs a whole new set of valves, and look at all those collision marks around her face, said the mechanic.

    I just want her fixed-up enough to use around the house; for longer trips I have my wife. 
  
  
 

Cinderella's Life at the Castle 
 

    After Cinderella married the prince she turned her attention to minutiae, using her glass slipper as a magnifying lens. 
    When at court she would wear orange peels and fish tins, and other decorous rubbish as found in back of the castle.

    You are making me very nervous, said the prince. 
    But Cinderella continued to look at something through her glass slipper. 
    Did you hear me? said the prince. 
    Cinderella's mouth hung open as she continued to look at something through her glass slipper. 
    Did you hear me, did you hear me, did you hear me? screamed the prince. 
  
 

A Journey Through the Moonlight

    In sleep when an old man's body is no longer aware of its boundaries, and lies flattened by gravity like a mere of wax in its bed. . .It drips down to the floor and moves there like a tear down a cheek. . .Under the back door  into the silver meadow, like a pool of sperm, frosty under the moon, as if in his first nature, boneless and absurd.

    The moon lifts him up into its white field, a cloud shaped like an old man, porous with stars. 
    He floats through high dark branches, a corpse tangled in a tree on a river. 
 

Summer, Forty Years Later

    He struggles out of a closet where his mother had hung him forty years ago. 
    She didn't understand children; she probably thought he was something made of cloth. 
    He thinks he as waited long enough for her to understand children, even though he is no longer a child. 
    After forty years a man has a right to seek the hallway; after all, he might even hope for the front door--and who knows, perhaps even a Nobel Prize for patience!

    From the front porch he sees that the midday sky is darker than he remembered it; the green of the lawn and trees has also darkened:  too many nights, too many coats of varnish. . . . 
    This is not the same summer, the color is gone. . .

    . . . That little boy who is always passing the house with his wagon has turned into a little old man collecting garbage. . . 
  

  Poems by Ai 
  
 
Cuba, 1962 
 

When the rooster jumps up on the windowsill 
and spreads his red-gold wings, 
I wake, thinking it is the sun 
and call Juanita, hearing her answer, 
but only in my mind. 
I know she is already outside, 
breaking the cane off at ground level, 
using only her big hands. 
I get the machete and walk among the cane, 
until I see her, lying face-down in the dirt.

Juanita, dead in the morning like this. 
I raise the machete—
what I take from the earth, I give back—
and cut off her feet. 
I lift the body and carry it to the wagon, 
where I load the cane to sell in the village. 
Whoever tastes my woman in his candy, his cake, 
tastes something sweeter than this sugar cane; 
it is grief. 
If you eat too much of it, you want more, 
you can never get enough. 
 


The Anniversary 
 

You raise the ax, 
the block of wood screams in half, 
while I lift the sack of flour 
and carry it into the house. 
I'm not afraid of the blade 
you've just pointed at my head. 
If I were dead, you could take the boy, 
hunt, kiss gnats, instead of my moist lips. 
Take it easy, squabs are roasting, 
corn, still in husks, crackles, 
as the boy dances around the table: 
old guest at a wedding party for two sad-faced clowns, 
who together, never won a round of anything but hard times. 
Come in, sheets are clean, 
fall down on me for one more year 
and we can blast another hole in ourselves without a sound. 
 

The Country Midwife:  A Day 
 

I bend over the woman. 
This is the third time between abortions. 
I dip a towel into a bucket of hot water 
and catch the first bit of blood, 
as the blue-pink dome of a head breaks through. 
A scraggy, red child comes out of her into my hands 
like warehouse ice sliding down a chute.

It's done, the stink of birth, Old Grizzly 
rears up on his hind legs in front of me 
and I want to go outside, 
but the air smells the same there too. 
The woman's left eye twitches 
and beneath her, a stain as orange as sunrise 
spreads over the sheet. 
I lift my short, blunt fingers to my face 
and I let her bleed, Lord, I let her bleed. 
  
The Hitchhiker

The Arizona wind dries out my nostrils 
and the heat of the sidewalk burns my shoes, 
as a woman drives up slowly. 
I get in, grinning at a face I do not like, 
but I slide my arm across the top of the seat 
and rest it lightly against her shoulder. 
We turn off into the desert, 
then I reach inside my pocket and touch the switchblade.

We stop, and as she moves closer to me, my hands ache, 
but somehow, I get the blade into her chest. 
I think a song:  "Everybody needs somebody, 
everybody needs somebody to love," 
as the black numerals 35 roll out of her right eye 
inside one small tear. 
Laughing, I snap my fingers.  Rape, murder, I got you 
in the sight of my gun.

I move off toward the street. 
My feet press down in it, 
familiar with the hot, soft asphalt 
that caresses them. 
The sun slips down into its cradle behind the mountains 
and it is hot, hotter than ever 
and I like it. 
  
 

The Root Eater 
 

The war has begun 
and I see the Root Eater bending, 
shifting his hands under the soil 
in search of the arthritic knuckles of trees. 
I see dazed flower stems 
pushing themselves back into the ground. 
I see turnips spinning endlessly 
on the blunt, bitten-off tips of their noses. 
I see the Root Eater going home on his knees, 
full of the ripe foundations of things, 
longing to send his seed up through his feet 
and out into the morning

but the stumps of trees heave themselves forward 
for the last march 
and the Root Eater waits, 
knowing he will be shoved, rootless, 
under the brown, scaly torso of the rock. 
  
  
 

Everything:  Eloy, Arizona, 1956 
 

Tin shack, where my baby sleeps on his back 
the way the hound taught him; 
highway, black zebra, with one white stripe; 
nickel in my pocket for chewing gum; 
you think you're all I've got. 
But when the 2 ton rolls to a stop 
and the driver gets out, 
I sit down in the shade and wave each finger, 
saving my whole hand till the last.

He's keys, tires, a fire lit in his belly 
in the diner up the road. 
I'm red toenails, tight blue halter, black slip. 
He's mine tonight.  I don't know him. 
He can only hurt me a piece at a time.

After a Long Time

the halves of the egg, impotence, 
slide into each other on waxed feet 
and the wait is over. 
The seam between my legs 
basted with hair tears apart, 
as your blue, flannel spoon slips inside, 
digs out the pieces of cracked shell 
and lays them on my thighs, 
like old china plates made too thin 
for holding anything but love.

To a Blossoming Pear Tree 
 

Beautiful natural blossoms, 
Pure delicate body, 
You stand without trembling. 
Little mist of fallen starlight, 
Perfect, beyond my reach, 
How I envy you. 
For if you could only listen, 
I would tell you something, 
Something human.

An old man 
Appeared to me once 
In the unendurable snow. 
He had a singe of white 
Beard on his face. 
He paused on a street in Minneapolis 
And stroked my face. 
Give it to me, he begged. 
I'll pay you anything.

I flinched.  Both terrified, 
We slunk away, 
Each in his own way dodging 
The cruel darts of the cold.

Beautiful natural blossoms, 
How could you possibly 
Worry or bother or care 
About the ashamed, hopeless 
Old man?  He was so near death 
He was willing to take 
Any love he could get, 
Even at the risk 
Of some mocking policeman 
Or some cute young wiseacre 
Smashing his dentures, 
Perhaps leading him on 
To a dark place and there 
Kicking him in his dead groin 
Just for the fun of it.

Young tree, unburdened 
By anything but your beautiful natural blossoms 
And dew, the dark 
Blood in my body drags me 
Down with my brother. 
  
Northern Pike 
 

All right.  Try this, 
Then.  Every body 
I know and care for, 
And every body 
Else is going 
To die in a loneliness 
I can't imagine and a pain 
I don't know.  We had 
To go on living.  We 
Untangled the net, we slit 
The body of this fish 
Open from the hinge of the tail 
To a place beneath the chin 
I wish I could sing of. 
I would just as soon we let 
The living go on living. 
An old poet whom we believe in 
Said the same thing, and so 
We paused among the dark cattails and prayed 
For the muskrats, 
For the ripples below their tails, 
For the little movements that we knew the crawdads were making under water, 
For the right-hand wrist of my cousin who is a policeman 
We prayed for the game warden's blindness. 
We prayed for the road home. 
We ate the fish. 
There must be something very beautiful in my body, 
I am so happy. 
  
  
A Blessing

Just off the highway to Rochester, Minnesota, 
Twilight bounds softly forth on the grass. 
And the eyes of those two Indian ponies 
Darken with kindness. 
They have come gladly out of the willows 
To welcome my friend and me. 
We step over the barbed wire into the pasture 
Where they have been grazing all day, alone. 
They ripple tensely, they can hardly contain their happiness 
That we have come. 
They bow shyly as wet swans.  They love each other. 
There is no loneliness like theirs. 
At home once more, they begin munching the young tufts of spring in the darkness. 
I would like to hold the slenderer one in my arms, 
For she has walked over to me 
And nuzzled my left hand. 
She is black and white, 
Her mane falls wild on her forehead, 
And the light breeze moves me to caress her long ear 
That is delicate as the skin over a girl's wrist. 
Suddenly I realize 
That if I stepped out of my body I would break 
Into blossom. 
  

Autumn Begins in Martins Ferry, Ohio

In the Shreve High football stadium, 
I think of Polacks nursing long beers in Tiltonsville, 
And gray faces of Negroes in the blast furnace at Benwood, 
And the ruptured night watchman of Wheeling Steel, 
Dreaming of heroes.

All the proud fathers are ashamed to go home. 
Their women cluck like starved pullets, 
Dying for love.

Therefore, 
Their sons grow suicidally beautiful 
At the beginning of October, 
And gallop terribly against each other's bodies. 
  
  
The Jewel

There is this cave 
In the air behind my body 
That nobody is going to touch: 
A cloister, a silence 
Closing around a blossom of fire. 
When I stand upright in the wind, 
My bones turn to dark emeralds. 
  
  
Lying in a Hammock at William Duffy's Farm in Pine Island, Minnesota 
 

Over my head, I see the bronze butterfly, 
Asleep on the black trunk, 
blowing like a leaf in green shadow. 
Down the ravine behind the empty house, 
The cowbells follow one another 
Into the distances of the afternoon. 
To my right, 
In a field of sunlight between two pines, 
The droppings of last year's horses 
Blaze up into golden stones. 
I lean back, as the evening darkens and comes on. 
A chicken hawk floats over, looking for home. 
I have wasted my life. 
  
  
Outside Fargo, North Dakota

Along the sprawled body of the derailed Great Northern freight car, 
I strike a match slowly and lift it slowly. 
No wind.

Beyond town, three heavy white horses 
Wade all the way to their shoulders 
In a silo shadow.

Suddenly the freight car lurches. 
The door slams back, a man with a flashlight 
Calls me good evening. 
I nod as I write good evening, lonely 
And sick for home. 
  

A Poem about George Doty in the Death House

Lured by the wall, and drawn 
To stare below the roof, 
Where pigeons nest aloof 
From prowling cats and men, 
I count the sash and bar 
Secured to granite stone, 
And note the daylight gone, 
Supper and silence near.

Close to the wall inside, 
Immured, empty of love, 
A man I have wondered of 
Lies patient, vacant-eye. 
A month and a day ago 
He stopped his car and found 
A girl on the darkening ground, 
And killed her in the snow.

Beside his cell, I am told, 
Hardy perennial bums 
Complain till twilight comes 
For hunger and for cold. 
They hardly know of a day 
That saw their hunger pass. 
Bred to the dark, their flesh 
Peacefully withers away.

The man who sits alone, 
He is the one for wonder, 
Who sways his fingers under 
The cleanly shaven chin, 
Who sees, in the shaving mirror 
Pinned to the barren wall, 
The uprooted ghost of all: 
The simple, easy terror.

Caught between sky and earth, 
Poor stupid animal, 
Stripped naked to the wall, 
He saw the blundered birth 
Of daemons beyond sound. 
Sick of the dark, he rose 
For love, and now he goes 
Back to the broken ground.

Now, as he grips the chain 
And holds the wall, to bear 
What no man ever bore, 
He hears the bums complain; 
But I mourn no soul but his, 
Not even the bums who die, 
Nor the homely girl whose cry 
Crumbled his pleading kiss. 
 



At the Executed Murderer's Grave

Why should we do this?  What good is it to us?  Above all, how can we do such a thing?  How can it possibly be done? 
--Freud

1. 
My name is James A. Wright, and I was born 
Twenty-five miles from this infected grave, 
In Martins Ferry, Ohio, where one slave 
To Hazel-Atlas Glass became my father. 
He tried to teach me kindness.  I return 
Only in memory now, aloof, unhurried, 
To dead Ohio, where I might lie buried, 
Had I not run away before my time. 
Ohio caught George Doty.  Clean as lime, 
His skull rots empty here.  Dying's the best 
Of all the arts men learn in a dead place. 
I walked here once.  I made my loud display, 
Leaning for language on a dead man's voice. 
Now sick of lies, I turn to face the past. 
I add my easy grievance to the rest:

2. 
Doty, if I confess I do not love you, 
Will you let me alone?  I burn for my own lies. 
The nights electrocute my fugitive, 
My mind.  I run like the bewildered mad 
At St. Clair Sanitarium, who lurk, 
Arch and cunning, under the maple trees, 
Pleased to be playing guilty after dark. 
Staring to bed, they croon self-lullabies. 
Doty, you make me sick.  I am not dead. 
I croon my tears at fifty cents per line.

3. 
Idiot, he demanded love from girls, 
And murdered one.  Also, he was a thief. 
He left two women, and a ghost with child. 
The hair, foul as a dog's upon his head, 
Made such revolting Ohio animals 
Fitter for vomit than a kind man's grief. 
I waste no pity on the dead that stink, 
And no love's lost between me and the crying 
Drunks of Belaire, Ohio, where police 
Kick at their kidneys till they die of drink. 
Christ may restore them whole, for all of me. 
Alive and dead, those giggling muckers who 
Saddled my nighmares thirty years ago 
Can do without my widely printed sighing. 
Over their pains with paid sincerity. 
I do not pity the dead, I pity the dying.

4. 
I pity myself, because a man is dead. 
If Belmont County killed him, what of me? 
His victims never loved him.  Why should we? 
And yet, nobody had to kill him either. 
It does no good to woo the grass, to veil 
The quicklime hole of a man's defeat and shame. 
Nature-lovers are gone.  To hell with them. 
I kick the clods away, and speak my name.

5. 
This grave's gash festers.  Maybe it will heal, 
When all are caught with what they had to do 
In fear of love, when every man stands still 
By the last sea, 
And the princes of the sea come down 
To lay away their robes, to judge the earth 
And its dead, and we dead stand undefended everywhere, 
And my bodies--father and child and unskilled criminal-- 
Ridiculously kneel to bare my scars, 
My sneaking crimes, to God's unpitying stars.

6. 
Staring politely, they will not mark my face 
From any murderer's, buried in this place. 
Why should they?  We are nothing but a man.

7. 
Doty, the rapist and the murderer, 
Sleeps in a ditch of fire, and cannot hear; 
And where, in earth or hell's unholy peace, 
Men's suicides will stop, God knows, not I. 
Angels and pebbles mock me under trees. 
Earth is a door I cannot even face. 
Order be damned, I do not want to die, 
Even to keep Belaire, Ohio, safe. 
The hackles on my neck are fear, not grief. 
(Open, dungeon!  Open, roof of the ground!) 
I hear the last sea in the Ohio grass, 
Heaving a tide of gray disastrousness. 
Wrinkles of winter ditch the rotted face 
Of Doty, killer, imbecile, and thief: 
Dirt of my flesh, defeated, underground. 
  

Saint Judas

When I went out to kill myself, I caught 
A pack of hoodlums beating up a man. 
Running to spare his suffering, I forgot 
My name, my number, how my day began, 
How soldiers milled around the garden stone 
And sang amusing songs; how all that day 
Their javelins measured crowds; how I alone 
Bargained the proper coins, and slipped away.

Banished from heaven, I found this victim beaten, 
Stripped, kneed, and left to cry.  Dropping my rope 
Aside, I ran, ignored the uniforms: 
Then I remembered bread my flesh had eaten, 
The kiss that ate my flesh.  Flayed without hope, 
I held the man for nothing in my arms. 
  
  

  
On the Skeleton of a Hound

Nightfall, that saw the morning-glories float
Tendril and string against the crumbling wall,
Nurses him now, his skeleton for grief,
His locks for comfort curled among the leaf.
Shuttles of moonlight weave his shadow tall,
Milkweed and dew flow upward to his throat.
Now catbird feathers plume the apple mound,
And starlings drowse to winter up the ground.
Thickened away from speech by fear, I move 
Around the body. Over his forepaws, steep
Declivities darken down the moonlight now,
And the long throat that bayed a year ago
Declines from summer. Flies would love to leap
Between his eyes and hum away the space
Between the ears, the hollow where a hare
Could hide; another jealous dog would tumble
The bones apart, angry, the shining crumble
Of a great body gleaming in the air;
Quivering pigeons foul his broken face.
I can imagine men who search the earth
For handy resurrections, overturn
The body of a beetle in its grave;
Whispering men digging for gods might delve
A pocket for these bones, then slowly burn
Twigs in the leaves, pray for another birth.
But I will turn my face away from this
Ruin of summer, collapse of fur and bone.
For once a white hare huddled up the grass,
The sparrows flocked away to see the race.
I stood on darkness, clinging to a stone,
I saw the two leaping alive on ice,
On earth, on leaf, humus and withered vine:
The rabbit splendid in a shroud of shade,
The dog carved on the sunlight, on the air,
Fierce and magnificent his rippled hair,
The cockleburs shaking around his head.
Then, suddenly, the hare leaped beyond pain
Out of the open meadow, and the hound
Followed the voiceless dancer to the moon,
To dark, to death, to other meadows where
Singing young women dance around a fire,
Where love reveres the living.

                                                    I alone
Scatter this hulk about the dampened ground;
And while the moon rises beyond me, throw
The ribs and spine out of their perfect shape.
For a last charm to the dead, I lift the skull
And toss it over the maples like a ball.
Strewn to the woods, now may that spirit sleep
That flamed over the ground a year ago.
I know the mole will heave a shinbone over,
The earthworm snuggle for a nap on paws,
The honest bees build honey in the head;
The earth knows how to handle the great dead
Who lived the body out, and broke its laws,
Knocked down a fence, tore up a field of clover.


Beginning

The moon drops one or two feathers into the fields.
The dark wheat listens.
Be still.
Now.
There they are, the moon's young, trying
Their wings.
Between trees, a slender woman lifts up the lovely shadow
Of her face, and now she steps into the air, now she is gone
Wholly, into the air.
I stand alone by an elder tree, I do not dare breathe
Or move.
I listen.
The wheat leans back toward its own darkness,
And I lean toward mine.


Trying to Pray

This time, I have left my body behind me, crying
In its dark thorns.
Still,
There are good things in this world.
It is dusk.
It is the good darkness
Of women's hands that touch loaves.
The spirit of a tree begins to move.
I touch leaves.
I close my eyes and think of water.

 

Depressed by a Book of Bad Poetry, I Walk Toward an Unused
Pasture and Invite the Insects to Join Me

Relieved, I let the book fall behind a stone.
I climb a slight rise of grass.
I do not want to disturb the ants
Who are walking single file up the fence post,
Carrying small white petals,
Casting shadows so frail that I can see through them.
I close my eyes for a moment and listen.
The old grasshoppers
Are tired, they leap heavily now,
Their thighs are burdened.
I want to hear them, they have clear sounds to make.
Then lovely, far off, a dark cricket begins
In the maple trees.


Small Frogs Killed On The Highway
Still,
I would leap too
Into the light,
If I had the chance.
It is everything, the wet green stalk of the field
On the other side of the road.
They crouch there, too, faltering in terror
And take strange wing. Many
Of the dead never moved, but many
Of the dead are alive forever in the split second
Auto headlights more sudden
Than their drivers know.
The drivers burrow backward into dank pools
Where nothing begets
Nothing.

Across the road, tadpoles are dancing
On the quarter thumbnail
Of the moon. They can't see,
Not yet.

Hook
I was only a young man
In those days. On that evening
The cold was so God damned
Bitter there was nothing.
Nothing. I was in trouble
With a woman, and there was nothing
There but me and dead snow.

I stood on the street corner
In Minneapolis, lashed
This way and that.
Wind rose from some pit,
Hunting me.
Another bus to Saint Paul
Would arrive in three hours,
If I was lucky.

Then the young Sioux
Loomed beside me, his scars
Were just my age.

Ain't got no bus here
A long time, he said.
You got enough money
To get home on?

What did they do
To your hand? I answered.
He raised up his hook into the terrible starlight
And slashed the wind.

Oh, that? he said.
I had a bad time with a woman. Here,
You take this.

Did you ever feel a man hold
Sixty-five cents
In a hook,
And place it
Gently
In your freezing hand?

I took it.
It wasn't the money I needed.
But I took it.

A Note Left in Jimmy Leonard's Shack

Near the dry river's water-mark we found
         Your brother Minnegan,
Flopped like a fish against the muddy ground.
Beany, the kid whose yellow hair turns green,
Told me to find you, even in the rain,
        And tell you he was drowned.

I hid behind the chassis on the bank,
         The wreck of someone's Ford:
I was afraid to come and wake you drunk:
You told me once the waking up was hard,
The daylight beating at you like a board.
        Blood in my stomach sank.

Beside, you told him never to go out
          Along the river-side
Drinking and singing, clattering about.
You might have thrown a rock at me and cried
I was to blame, I let him fall in the road
          And pitch down on his side.

Well, I'll get hell enough when I get home
          For coming up this far,
Leaving the note, and running as I came.
I'll go and tell my father where you are.
You'd better go find Minnegan before
         Policemen hear and come.

Beany went home, and I got sick and ran,
          You old son of a bitch.
You better hurry down to Minnegan;
He's drunk or dying now, I don't know which,
Rolled in the roots and garbage like a fish,
           The poor old man.



           Adam and Eve

I wanted to punch her right in the mouth and that's the truth.

After all, we had gotten from the station of the flickering glances
to the station of the hungry mouths,
from the shoreline of skirts and faded jeans
to the ocean of unencumbered skin,
from the perilous mountaintop of the apartment steps
to the sanctified valley of the bed--

the candle fluttering upon the dresser top, its little yellow blade
sending up its whiff of waxy smoke,
and I could smell her readiness
like a dank cloud above a field,

when at the crucial moment, the all-important moment,
the moment standing at attention,
she held her milk white hand agitatedly
over the entrance to her body and said No,
and my brain burst into flame.

If I couldn't sink myself in her like a dark spur
or dissolve into her like a clod thrown in a river,
can I go all the way in the saying, and say
I wanted to punch her right in the face?
Am I allowed to say that,
that I wanted to punch her right in her soft face?

Or is the saying just another instance of rapaciousness,
just another way of doing what I wanted then,
by saying it?

Is a man just an animal, and is a woman not an animal?
Is the name of the animal power?
Is it true that the man wishes to see the woman
hurt with her own pleasure

and the woman wishes to see the expression on the man's face
of someone falling from great height,
that the woman thrills with the power of her weakness
and the man is astonished by the weakness of his power?

Is the sexual chase a hunt where the animal inside
drags the human down
into a jungle made of vowels,
hormonal undergrowth of sweat and hair,

or is this an obsolete idea
lodged like a fossil
in the brain of the ape
who lives inside the man?

Can the fossil be surgically removed
or dissolved, or redesigned
so the man can be a human being, like a woman?

Does the woman see the man as a house
where she might live in safety,
and does the man see the woman as a door
through which he might escape
the hated prison of himself,

and when the door is locked,
does he hate the door instead?
Does he learn to hate all doors?

I've seen rain turn into snow then back to rain,
and I've seen making love turn into fucking
then back to making love,
and no one covered up their faces out of shame,
no one rose and walked into the lonely maw of night.

But where was there, in fact, to go?
Are some things better left unsaid?
Shall I tell you her name?
Can I say it again,
that I wanted to punch her right in the face?

Until we say the truth, there can be no tenderness.
As long as there is desire, we will not be safe.




Dickhead
 

To whomever taught me the word dickhead,
I owe a debt of thanks.
It gave me a way of being in the world of men
when I most needed one,

when I was pale and scrawny,
naked, goosefleshed
as a plucked chicken

in a supermarket cooler, a poor
forked thing stranded in the savage
universe of puberty, where wild

jockstraps flew across the steamy
skies of locker rooms,
and everybody fell down laughing

at jokes I didn’t understand.
But dickhead was a word as dumb
and democratic as a hammer, an object

you could pick up in your hand,
and swing,
saying dickhead this and dickhead that,

a song that meant the world
was yours enough at least
to bang on like a garbage can,

and knowing it, and having that
beautiful ugliness always
cocked and loaded in my mind,

protected me and calmed me like a psalm. 
Now I have myself become
a beautiful ugliness,

and my weakness is a fact
so well established that
it makes me calm,

and I am calm enough 
to be grateful for the lives I
never have to live again;

but I remember all the bad old days
back in the world of men,
when everything was serious, mysterious, scary,

hairier and bigger than I was;
I recall when flesh
was what I hated, feared

and was excluded from:
Hardly knowing what I did,
or what would come of it,

I made a word my friend.




Texaco

The nozzle of the gas pump
plunged into the flank of the car
like the curved beak of a predatory bird

looks like it is drinking
or maybe I'm light-headed
from the fumes

or from the slanted light
of Thursday afternoon.
—Still, it is a powerful moment

when I squeeze the trigger of the handle
and feel, beneath the stained cement,
the deep shudder and convulsion

of the gasoline begin
its plunging rush in my direction.
Out of the guts of the earth,

filtered through sand and blood
down the long hose of history
towards the very nipple of this moment:

—the mechanical ticking of the pump,
the sound of my car drinking—
filling my tank with a necessary story

about the road, how we have
to have it to go down;
the whole world construed around

this singular, solitary act
as if I myself had conjured it
from some strange thirst.




Lie Down with a Man
In those days I thought I had to 
do everything I was afraid of,
so I lay down with a man.

It was one item on a list--
sleeping in the graveyard, under the full moon,
not looking away from the burned girl's stricken face,
strapping myself into the catapult
of some electric blue pill.

It was the seventies, a whole generation of us
was more than willing to chainsaw through
the branch that we were sitting on
to see what falling felt like--bump bump bump.

Knowing the worse about yourself
seemed like self-improvement then,
and suffering was adventure.

So I lay down with a man,
which I really don't remember
except that it was humorless.

Curtains fluttered in the breeze
from the radio's black grill. Van Morrison
filled up the room like astral aftershave.

I lay my mass of delusions
next to his mass of delusions
in the dark room where I struggled
with the old adversary, myself


--in the form, this time, of a body--
someplace between heaven and earth,
two things I was afraid of.




The Replacement


And across the country I know
they are replacing my brother's brain
with the brain of a man;

one gesture, one word, one neuron at a time
with surgical precision
they are teaching him to hook his thumbs
into his belt, to iron his mouth as flat
as the horizon, and make his eyes
reflective as a piece of tin.

It is a kind of cooking
the male child undergoes:
to toughen him, he is dipped repeatedly
in insult--peckerwood, shitbag, faggot,
pussy, dicksucker--until spear points
will break against his epidermis,
until his is impossible to disappoint.

Then he walks out into the street
ready for a game of corporate poker
with a hard-on for the Dow-Jones
like this hormonal language I am
flexing like a bicep
to show who's boss.

But I'm not the boss.
And there is nothing I can do to stop it,
and would I if I could?
What else is there for him to be
except a man?
If they fail,
he stumbles through his life
like an untied shoe.
If they succeed, he may become
something even I can't love.

Already the photograph I have of him
is out of date
but in it he is standing by the pool
without a shirt: too young, too white, too weak,
with feelings he is too inept to hide
splashed over his face--

goofy, proud, shy,
he's smiling at the camera
as if he were under the illusion
that someone loved him so well
they would not ever ever ever
turn him over to the world.


Why the Young Men Are So Ugly


They have little tractors in their blood
and all day the tractors climb up and down
inside their arms and legs, their
collarbones and heads.

That is why they yell and scream and slam the barbells
down into their clanking slots,
making the metal ring like sledgehammers on iron,
like dungeon prisoners rattling their chains.

That is why they shriek their tires at the stopsign,
why they turn the base up on the stereo
until it shakes the traffic light, until it
dryhumps the eardrum of the crossing guard.

Testosterone is a drug,
and they say No, No, No until
they are overwhelmed and punch
their buddy in the face for joy,

or make a joke about gravy and bottomless holes
to a middle-aged waitress who is gently
setting down the plate in front of them.

If they are grotesque, if
what they say and do is often nothing more
than a kind of psychopathic fart,

it is only because of the tractors,
the tractors in their blood,
revving their engines, chewing up the turf
inside their arteries and veins
It is the testosterone tractor

constantly climbing the mudhill of the world
and dragging the young man behind it
by a chain around his leg.
In the stink and the noise, in the clouds
of filthy exhaust

is where they live. It is the tractors
that make them
what they are. While they make being a man
look like a disease.
 

America

Then one of the students with blue hair and a tongue stud
Says that America is for him a maximum-security prison

Whose walls are made of RadioShacks and Burger Kings, and MTV episodes
Where you can't tell the show from the commercials,

And as I consider how to express how full of shit I think he is,
He says that even when he's driving to the mall in his Isuzu

Trooper with a gang of his friends, letting rap music pour over them
Like a boiling Jacuzzi full of ballpeen hammers, even then he feels

Buried alive, captured and suffocated in the folds
Of the thick satin quilt of America

And I wonder if this is a legitimate category of pain,
or whether he is just spin doctoring a better grade,

And then I remember that when I stabbed my father in the dream last night,
It was not blood but money

That gushed out of him, bright green hundred-dollar bills
Spilling from his wounds, and—this is the weird part—,

He gasped, "Thank god—those Ben Franklins were
Clogging up my heart—

And so I perish happily,
Freed from that which kept me from my liberty"—

Which is when I knew it was a dream, since my dad
Would never speak in rhymed couplets,

And I look at the student with his acne and cell phone and phony ghetto clothes
And I think, "I am asleep in America too,

And I don't know how to wake myself either,"
And I remember what Marx said near the end of his life:

"I was listening to the cries of the past,
When I should have been listening to the cries of the future."

But how could he have imagined 100 channels of 24-hour cable
Or what kind of nightmare it might be

When each day you watch rivers of bright merchandise run past you
And you are floating in your pleasure boat upon this river

Even while others are drowning underneath you
And you see their faces twisting in the surface of the waters

And yet it seems to be your own hand
Which turns the volume higher?

 

Rap Music

Twenty-six men trapped in a submarine
are pounding on the walls with a metal pipe,
shouting what they'll do when they get out.
Or they are rolled up in a rug in the back
of a rug truck that has wrecked.

No, it's the car pulled up next to mine in traffic
with the windows rolled down and the sound turned up
so loud it puts everything in italics: enough to make the asphalt thump
and the little leaves of shrubbery
in front of the nice brick houses quake.

I don't know what's going on inside that portable torture chamber,
but I have a bad suspicion
there's a lot of dead white people in there

on a street lit by burning police cars
where a black man is striking the head of a white one
again and again with a brick,
then lifting the skull to drink blood from the hole—

But that's what art is for, isn't it?
It's about giving expression to the indignation—
it's for taking the in out of the inhibitchin;
so maybe my ears are just a little hysterical
or maybe my fear is a little historical

and you know, I'd like to form an exploratory committee
to investigate that question—
and I'd like that committee to produce a documentary
called The Sweet Sounds of Afro-American,

but all this ugly noise is getting in the way,
and what I'm not supposed to say
is that Black for me is a country
more foreign than China or Vagina,
more alarming than going down Niagara on Viagra—

and it makes me feel stupid when I get close
like a little white dog on the edge of a big dark woods
I'm not supposed to look directly into

and there's this pounding noise
like a heartbeat full of steroids,
like a thousand schizophrenic Shakespeares
killing themselves at high volume—

this tangled roar
that has to be shut up or blown away or sealed off
or actually mentioned and entered.

 

Reading Moby-Dick at 30,000 Feet

At this height, Kansas
is just a concept,
a checkerboard design of wheat and corn

no larger than the foldout section
of my neighbor's travel magazine.
At this stage of the journey

I would estimate the distance
between myself and my own feelings
is roughly the same as the mileage

from Seattle to New York,
so I can lean back into the upholstered interval
between Muzak and lunch,

a little bored, a little old and strange.
I remember, as a dreamy
backyard kind of kid,

tilting up my head to watch
those planes engrave the sky
in lines so steady and so straight

they implied the enormous concentration
of good men,
but now my eyes flicker

from the in-flight movie
to the stewardess's pantyline,
then back into my book,

where men throw harpoons at something
much bigger and probably
better than themselves,

wanting to kill it,
wanting to see great clouds of blood erupt
to prove that they exist.

Imagine being born and growing up,
rushing through the world for sixty years
at unimaginable speeds.

Imagine a century like a room so large,
a corridor so long
you could travel for a lifetime

and never find the door,
until you had forgotten
that such a thing as doors exist.

Better to be on board the Pequod,
with a mad one-legged captain
living for revenge.

Better to feel the salt wind
spitting in your face,
to hold your sharpened weapon high,

to see the glisten
of the beast beneath the waves.
What a relief it would be

to hear someone in the crew
cry out like a gull,
Oh Captain, Captain!

Where are we going now?       



February

This is the second month of the year I turn thirty-seven.
Already the weather is warming in southeast Texas, rushing
The weeks along; the trees have to work to keep up. One day
I'll look over my head and the elm will be leafed out,
And then it will be summer. And probably I'll be working
On my birthday, probably teaching a couple of classes,
And I'll say to myself, it's just as well, who needs to think about
Turning thirty-seven, and I'll go back to my regular life,
Smiling and talking to students in the hallway,
Breaking a sweat on the short walk from the door
To the parked car, rolling all the windows down
But not without glancing at the sky for stormclouds,
Because a storm will be breaking every day then after noon,
Lasting about an hour, and subsiding back to sun. You learn
Such things about the weather when you've lived in a place
For a while. Or maybe it's really what some people say,
It's like that everywhere; I haven't been anywhere near
Everywhere, and maybe I'll never make it.
But there were years when I liked to search out danger,
Late nights I learned each secret worn-out cars
Bouncing through the ruts of logging roads could take me to.
I learned about love like that; the full moon pierced
The windshield like a spike and I knew it was love
When the strong, agile boy above me sighed
And pushed deeper inside me. I knew it was love
When I didn't want to close my eyes. I learned about trouble
And I knew it was trouble when I dropped out of high school
My senior year and took to prowling the roads with boys;
We took to shooting heroin under the spring sky,
We'd lie back together in the roadside grass and all let go
Of our suffering, we were having a hard time growing up,
It felt good to do a terrible thing together.
No one could find us there. No one was looking.
We would've counted the stars, but that was work.
Instead we talked about loving one another, and I guess
You'd say it was the heroin talking, but we thought we felt it,
We were free together, we knew how we were when no one
Could know us because we were doing evil. I took myself
Far from those foothills the first chance I could.
I didn't find out what became of my friends, it looked like
Some of them were headed for prison; I loved them once
But I wouldn't love them now, and I didn't want to
Think about mixing love and trouble, the trick I learned
And never gave up; I just got older, and stopped
Getting into the trouble of the young; I discovered
The trouble of the older.
                                     This is the second month
Of the year I turn thirty-seven. Already the little fists
Of leaves are forming inside the knotted ends of twigs
All over Houston. The cold weather is over. This winter
Again there was no freeze. And tonight it's very late,
And it's Sunday, and no cars pass on the big road
By the house, but out there in the night
Some kids about seventeen are doing terrible things
They'll get by with, and grow out of, and remember
The way they'll remember what love felt like at first,
Before it stopped being the surest path to ruination,
Before it had done the worst it could and passed away.
And to them it's as if those who lived this life before them
Moved with the jerky speeded-up gestures of characters
In old-fashioned movies, their expressions intense
And exaggerated; they roll their eyes and loll their tongues
When the heroin hits their blood. It's as if the beauty
Of evil lives only in the present, where the drop of dope
Clinging to the tip of the stainless steel point
Catches the light like dew; and it doesn't matter
That the light falls from a streetlamp with a short in it,
And the impatient boy with the syringe in his hand
Will touch the drop back into the spoon
So as not to waste it. It's his instinct telling him
How much it means to live this now, before he knows
Better, while he still has a chance to survive it.
It's the moon over his head with its polished horns
That would slip through his skin if he touched them.
It's the trees leaping to life in his blood, greenness
Unfurling so hard it almost bursts his heart.


The Accident

I had no business there in the first place— 
I'm putting on weight—but the counter help was all smiles,
Having survived the lunch hour crunch. My husband and I
Ordered burgers and fries; I was in front, so I chose
A seat on the far side, back to the window.
I picked off two thin rings of onion; the fries were limp.
Something about the car, maybe, both of us
Interested, me a little bitchy, so it was almost the way you turn
Instinctively, say from a spider web in a darkened hall,
How I looked across the restaurant and found her face,
Left cheekbone swollen to a baseball, the same eye blackened,
Heavy make-up, front tooth out in a jack-o-lantern grin
As she tried to look friendly to the young waitress
Her husband motioned over. He rested one hand
On his wife's shoulder, solicitous, the other waving
A lit cigarette, a small man, dark-haired, now laughing aloud,
Glancing at the uncombed head of his beaten wife again
Turning her back to the room, though not crowded,
All suddenly staring, reading the last few hours
Of those lives in a horror of recognition.
She cupped her hand shading the side of her face,
You could see lumps of vertebrae through her t-shirt,
And he kept on talking, smiling at her, with a slight tilt
Of his head, as if saying poor baby, something happened to her,
Good thing I'm here to take care of her, a car wreck,
A bad one, a smash-up, and all of us looked
And knew better. At the table with them was a little girl.
The man, the woman, the five-year-old daughter— 
Even the man and the beaten woman had the same features,
As people do who have lived together for years. I couldn't see
The child's face. He was jotting a note on a small pad,
The waitress's name, as if to write a letter praising
Her fine service, and she smiled through her horror, she
Hardly more than sixteen, with clear pale skin. Next to us
A woman in permed hair and suit rose to leave, lunch untouched,
With her daughter. She carried a leather legal-sized folder.
We left soon after, heads turned, not looking,
Because sometime the man and woman would go
Home to the privacy of a city apartment, no neighbors
Home all day to hear, but first I said, in the restaurant,
Across the room where he couldn't hear, If I had a gun 
I'd blow his brains out, and I thought of that moment
Familiar from movies, the round black hole in the forehead
Opening, the back of the skull blowing out frame by frame
Like a baseball smashing a window, but no one near
Would've even been bloodied because no one was standing anywhere
Near him, his hand on the beaten woman's shoulder
Might as well've been yards from his body.

I was taught not to write about this. But my teacher,
A man with a reputation who hoped I would make
Good, never knew that I, too, have been hit in the face by a man.
He knew only my clumsy efforts to cast what happened
Into "characters," and he loved the beauty in poetry.
Maybe what I had written was awkward. Maybe my teacher
Guessed what happened and forbade me writing it
For some good reason, he cared for me, or he feared
He too might've slapped my face, because I, like the character
In that first effort, was bitching to the heavens and a redneck
Boyfriend, and we argued outdoors, near a stack of light wood
Used to kindle the stove like everyone has
In the foothills of North Carolina. That day I railed
Like a caricature of a bitching redneck woman,
Hands on hips, sometimes a clenched fist, I was
Bitching, I think, as he planned some stupid ting
I hated, like fishing, pitching horseshoes, driving
To visit his mother on Sundays, her tiny house
Tangled in dirt roads, where she sat in the kitchen dipping snuff.
Whatever he wanted to do was harmless,
But so was my shrieking, my furious pleading, an endless loop
Inside my head rolling I want to be rid of him, and he slapped me
Across my open mouth, I felt myself shut up and staggered,
Because he was a large man, and I was a large woman,
He had to make sure he hit me pretty hard,
Both of us strong and mad as hell, early
One Saturday morning, when he wanted to do what he wanted to do
And I wanted to keep him from it. He slapped me
Twice, open-handed, knocking me, open-handed, to my knees,
In kindling, so my knees were scraped bloody and my hand
Closed on a foot and a half of inch-thick pine, and I stumbled up,
Swinging, my eyes popping wide, till I brought it down
Hard across his shoulder, I saw how the rage on his face
Flashed to fear, just that quick, a second, or less,
And he turned to run but he made the wrong choice,
If he'd gone to the road I wouldn've followed, but he ran
Inside my "duplex" apartment, an old country house
Cut in two. So I cornered him upstairs and knocked him out.
It was simple. He fell so hard, I thought I've killed him;
I was throwing my clothes in a paper bag when I heard him
Sobbing. In the bathroom mirror I found the black eye and lop-sided lip,
And it seemed as if I might still take it back, the last ten minutes,
The chase, the beating, the high-pitched screaming,
The stubborn need to go fishing. But the make-up I disdained
In those years—I had just turned twenty—didn't do much
To cover the bruises. His face was clear. The knot on his head
Stopped swelling under ice. It was easy to tell him
To get the hell out and only regret it every other minute
Since there were no children, no marriage, even,
And I was young and believed I had proven
I was strong. I had beaten a man to his knees.
Months later I would go to college and stay safely there for years,
Not letting on to anyone the terrible things I'd done, until I wrote
That clumsy poem with the unbelievable characters, and now I've tried
To do it again, this time with different characters, I've defied
My teacher, who meant for me to learn to write well,
Who meant for the world to think well of me,
And I am not sorry. If he asked why I would say
I had to do it, and that lie would be like the lie of living
Without telling, till one day seeing the beaten face,
What scared me most, the missing tooth, the tangled hair, the vertebrae,
The daughter. There is no use thinking what it means
About me to say this: I am not sorry. I might have killed
That man. I might have blown his brains out.               
 


 My Papa's Waltz 
 

The whiskey on your breath 
Could make a small boy dizzy; 
But I hung on like death: 
Such waltzing was not easy.

We romped until the pans 
Slid from the kitchen shelf; 
My mother's countenance 
Could not unfrown itself.

The hand that held my wrist 
Was battered on one knuckle; 
At every step you missed 
My right ear scraped a buckle.

You beat time on my head 
With a palm caked hard by dirt, 
Then waltzed me off to bed 
Still clinging to your shirt.
 

Child on Top of a Greenhouse

The wind billowing out the seat of my britches,
My feet crackling splinters of glass and dried putty,
The half-grown chrysanthemums staring up like accusers,
Up through the streaked glass, flashing with sunlight,
A few white clouds all rushing eastward,
A line of elms plunging and tossing like horses,
And everyone, everyone pointing up and shouting!

Cuttings (Later)

This urge, wrestle, resurrection of dry sticks,
Cut stems struggling to put down feet,
What saint strained so much,
Rose on such lopped limbs to a new life?
I can hear, underground, that sucking and sobbing,
In my veins, in my bones I feel it—
The small waters seeping upward,
The tight grains parting at last.
When sprouts break out,
Slippery as fish,
I quail, lean to beginnings, sheath-wet. 



The Meadow Mouse

1.

In a shoe box stuffed in an old nylon stocking
Sleeps the baby mouse I found in the meadow,
Where he trembled and shook beneath a stick
Till I caught him up by the tail and brought him in,
Cradled in my hand,
A little quaker, the whole body of him trembling,
His absurd whiskers sticking out like a cartoon-mouse,
His feet like small leaves,
Little lizard-feet,
Whitish and spread wide when he tried to struggle away,
Wriggling like a minuscule puppy.

Now he's eaten his three kinds of cheese and drunk from his
bottle-cap watering-trough—
So much he just lies in one corner,
His tail curled under him, his belly big
As his head; his bat-like ears
Twitching, tilting toward the least sound.

Do I imagine he no longer trembles
When I come close to him?
He seems no longer to tremble.

2.

But this morning the shoe-box house on the back porch is empty.
Where has he gone, my meadow mouse,
My thumb of a child that nuzzled in my palm? —
To run under the hawk's wing,
Under the eye of the great owl watching from the elm-tree,
To live by courtesy of the shrike, the snake, the tom-cat.

I think of the nestling fallen into the deep grass,
The turtle gasping in the dusty rubble of the highway,
The paralytic stunned in the tub, and the water rising,—
All things innocent, hapless, forsaken.


The Geranium

When I put her out, once, by the garbage pail,
She looked so limp and bedraggled,
So foolish and trusting, like a sick poodle,
Or a wizened aster in late September,
I brought her back in again
For a new routine—
Vitamins, water, and whatever
Sustenance seemed sensible
At the time: she'd lived
So long on gin, bobbie pins, half-smoked cigars, dead beer,
Her shriveled petals falling
On the faded carpet, the stale
Steak grease stuck to her fuzzy leaves.
(Dried-out, she creaked like a tulip.)

The things she endured!—
The dumb dames shrieking half the night
Or the two of us, alone, both seedy,
Me breathing booze at her,
She leaning out of her pot toward the window.

Near the end, she seemed almost to hear me—
And that was scary—
So when that snuffling cretin of a maid
Threw her, pot and all, into the trash-can,
I said nothing.

But I sacked the presumptuous hag the next week,
I was that lonely.

 

Dolor

I have known the inexorable sadness of pencils,
Neat in their boxes, dolor of pad and paper weight,
All the misery of manilla folders and mucilage,
Desolation in immaculate public places,
Lonely reception room, lavatory, switchboard,
The unalterable pathos of basin and pitcher,
Ritual of multigraph, paper-clip, comma,
Endless duplicaton of lives and objects.
And I have seen dust from the walls of institutions,
Finer than flour, alive, more dangerous than silica,
Sift, almost invisible, through long afternoons of tedium,
Dropping a fine film on nails and delicate eyebrows,
Glazing the pale hair, the duplicate grey standard faces.

 

 

Root Cellar
Nothing would sleep in that cellar, dank as a ditch,
Bulbs broke out of boxes hunting for chinks in the dark,
Shoots dangled and drooped,
Lolling obscenely from mildewed crates,
Hung down long yellow evil necks, like tropical snakes.
And what a congress of stinks!
Roots ripe as old bait,
Pulpy stems, rank, silo-rich,
Leaf-mold, manure, lime, piled against slippery planks.
Nothing would give up life:
Even the dirt kept breathing a small breath.


Apostle Town 
 

After your death. 
It was windy every day. 
Every day. 
Opposed us like a wall. 
We went. 
Shouting sideways at one another. 
Along the road. 
It was useless. 
The spaces between us. 
Got hard. 
They are empty spaces. 
And yet they are solid. 
And black and grievous. 
As gaps between the teeth. 
Of an old woman. 
You knew years ago. 
When she was. 
Beautiful the nerves pouring around in her like palace fire. 
  
 

Love Town

She ran in. 
Wet corn. 
Yellow braid. 
Down her back. 
 

Town of the Sound of a Twig Breaking

Their faces I thought were knives. 
The way they pointed them at me. 
And waited. 
A hunter is someone who listens. 
So hard to his prey it pulls the weapon. 
Out of his hand and impales. 
Itself. 
  
 

Town of Spring Once Again

"Spring is always like what it used to be." 
Said an old Chinese man. 
Rain hissed down the windows. 
Longings from a great distance. 
Reached us. 
  
 

Bride Town

Hanging on the daylight black. 
As an overcoat with no man in it one cold bright. 
Noon the Demander was waiting for me. 
  
 

Town on the Way through God's Woods

Tell me. 
Have you ever seen woods so. 
Deep so. 
Every tree a word does your heart stop? 
Once I saw a cloud over Bolivia so deep. 
Mountains were cowering do you ever? 
Look in so quick you see the secret. 
Word inside the word? 
As in an abandoned railway car. 
One winter afternoon I saw. 
The word for "God's woods." 



The Day Lady Died

 It is 12:20 in New York a Friday 
three days after Bastille day, yes 
it is 1959 and I go get a shoeshine 
because I will get off the 4:19 in Easthampton 
at 7:15 and then go straight to dinner 
and I don’t know the people who will feed meI walk up the muggy street beginning to sun 
and have a hamburger and a malted and buy 
an ugly NEW WORLD WRITING to see what the poets 
in Ghana are doing these days 
                                                         I go on to the bank 
and Miss Stillwagon (first name Linda I once heard) 
doesn’t even look up my balance for once in her life 
and in the GOLDEN GRIFFIN I get a little Verlaine 
for Patsy with drawings by Bonnard although I do 
Brendan Behan’s new play or Le Balcon or Les Negres 
of Genet, but I don’t, I stick with Verlaine 
after practically going to sleep with quandarinessand for Mike I just stroll into the PARK LANE 
Liquor Store and ask for a bottle of Strega and 
then I go back where I came from to 6th Avenue 
and the tobacconist in the Ziegfeld Theatre and 
casually ask for a carton of Gauloises and a carton 
of Picayunes, and a NEW YORK POST with her face on itand I am sweating a lot by now and thinking of 
leaning on the john door in the 5 SPOT 
while she whispered a song along the keyboard 
to Mal Waldron and everyone and I stopped breathing


 

Why I am Not A Painter

I am not a painter, I am a poet. 
Why? I think I would rather be 
a painter, but I am not. Well,
for instance, Mike Goldberg 
is starting a painting. I drop in. 
"Sit down and have a drink" be 
says. I drink; we drink. I look 
up. "You have SARDINES in it." 
"Yes, it needed something there."

"Oh." I go and the days go by 
and I drop in again. The painting 
is going on, and I go, and the days 
go by. I drop in. The painting is 
finished. "Where's SARDINES?" 
All that's left is just
letters, "It was too much," Mike says.

But me? One day I am thinking of 
a color: orange. I write a line 
about orange. Pretty soon it is a 
whole page of words, not lines. 
Then another page. There should be 
so much more, not of orange, of 
words, of how terrible orange is 
and life. Days go by. It is even in 
prose, I am a real poet. My poem 
is finished and I haven't mentioned 
orange yet. It's twelve poems, I call 
it ORANCES. And one day in a gallery 
I see Mike's painting, called SARDINES. 
 

Poem

Lana Turner has collapsed!
I was trotting along and suddenly
it started raining and snowing
and you said it was hailing
but hailing hits you on the head 
hard so it was really snowing and
raining and I was in such a hurry
to meet you but the traffic
was acting exactly like the sky
and suddenly I see a headline
LANA TURNER HAS COLLAPSED!
there is no snow in Hollywood
there is no rain in California
I have been to lots of parties
and acted perfectly disgraceful
but I never actually collapsed
oh Lana Turner we love you get up

 

The Eager Note on My Door Said Call Me

The eager note on my door said "Call me,"
call when you get in!" so I quickly threw
a few tangerines into my overnight bag,
straightened my eyelids and shoulders, and

headed straight for the door. It was autumn
by the time I got around the corner, oh all
unwilling to be either pertinent or bemused, but
the leaves were brighter than grass on the sidewalk!

Funny, I thought, that the lights are on this late
and the hall door open; still up at this hour, a
champion jai-alai player like himself? Oh fie!
for shame! What a host, so zealous! And he was

there in the hall, flat on a sheet of blood that
ran down the stairs. I did appreciate it. There are few
hosts who so thoroughly prepare to greet a guest
only casually invited, and that several months ago. 

 

To the Harbormaster

I wanted to be sure to reach you;
though my ship was on the way it got caught
in some moorings. I am always tying up
and then deciding to depart. In storms and
at sunset, with the metallic coils of the tide
around my fathomless arms, I am unable
to understand the forms of my vanity
or I am hard alee with my Polish rudder
in my hand and the sun sinking. To
you I offer my hull and the tattered cordage
of my will. The terrible channels where
the wind drives me against the brown lips
of the reeds are not all behind me. Yet
I trust the sanity of my vessel; and
if it sinks it may well be in answer
to the reasoning of the eternal voices,
the waves which have kept me from reaching you. 

 

Song

Is it dirty
does it look dirty
that's what you think of in the city

does it just seem dirty
that's what you think of in the city
you don't refuse to breathe do you

someone comes along with a very bad character
he seems attractive. is he really. yes. very
he's attractive as his character is bad. is it. yes

that's what you think of in the city
run your finger along your no-moss mind
that's not a thought that's soot

and you take a lot of dirt off someone
is the character less bad. no. it improves constantly
you don't refuse to breathe do you 

 

As Planned

After the first glass of vodka
you can accept just about anything
of life even your own mysteriousness
you think it is nice that a box
of matches is purple and brown and is called
La Petite and comes from Sweden
for they are words that you know and that
is all you know words not their feelings
or what they mean and you write because
you know them not because you understand them
because you don't you are stupid and lazy
and will never be great but you do
what you know because what else is there?


Music


If I rest for a moment near The Equestrian
pausing for a liver sausage sandwich in the Mayflower Shoppe,
that angel seems to be leading the horse into Bergdorf's
and I am naked as a table cloth, my nerves humming.
Close to the fear of war and the stars which have disappeared.
I have in my hands only 35c, it's so meaningless to eat!
and gusts of water spray over the basins of leaves
like the hammers of a glass pianoforte. If I seem to you
to have lavender lips under the leaves of the world,
I must tighten my belt.
It's like a locomotive on the march, the season
of distress and clarity
and my door is open to the evenings of midwinter's
lightly falling snow over the newspapers.
Clasp me in your handkerchief like a tear, trumpet
of early afternoon! in the foggy autumn.
As they're putting up the Christmas trees on Park Avenue
I shall see my daydreams walking by with dogs in blankets,
put to some use before all those coloured lights come on!
But no more fountains and no more rain,
and the stores stay open terribly late.


A Step Away From Them

It's my lunch hour, so I go 
for a walk among the hum-colored
cabs. First, down the sidewalk 
where laborers feed their dirty
glistening torsos sandwiches 
and Coca-Cola, with yellow helmets 
on. They protect them from falling 
bricks, I guess. Then onto the 
avenue where skirts are flipping
above heels and blow up over 
grates. The sun is hot, but the 
cabs stir up the air. I look 
at bargains in wristwatches. There 
are cats playing in sawdust.
On 
to Times Square, where the sign 
blows smoke over my head, and higher
the waterfall pours lightly. A 
Negro stands in a doorway with a 
toothpick, languorously agitating
A blonde chorus girl clicks: he 
smiles and rubs his chin. Everything 
suddenly honks: it is 12:40 of 
a Thursday.

Neon in daylight is a 
great pleasure, as Edwin Denby would 
write, as are light bulbs in daylight. 
I stop for a cheeseburger at JULIET'S 
CORNER. Giulietta Maina, wife of 
Federico Fellini, é bell' attrice. 
And chocolate malted. A lady in 
foxes on such a day puts her poodle 
in a cab.

There are several Puerto 
Ricans on the avenue today, which 
makes it beautiful and warm. First 
Bunny died, then John Latouche, 
then Jackson Pollock. But is the 
earth as full of life was full, of them? 
And one has eaten and one walks, 
past the magazines with nudes 
and the posters for BULLFIGHT and 
the Manhatten Storage Warehouse, 
which they'll soon tear down. I 
used to think they had the Armory
Show there.

A glass of papaya juice 
and back to work. My heart is in my 
pocket, it is Poems by Pierre Reverdy. 
 

Autobiographia Literaria

When I was a child
I played by myself in a 
corner of the schoolyard
all alone.

I hated dolls and I
hated games, animals were
not friendly and birds 
flew away.

If anyone was looking 
for me I hid behind a 
tree and cried out "I am
an orphan."

And here I am, the 
center of all beauty! 
writing these poems!
Imagine!

 

 

Steps

How funny you are today New York
like Ginger Rogers in Swingtime
and St. Bridget's steeple leaning a little to the left

here I have just jumped out of a bed full of V-days
(I got tired of D-days) and blue you there still
accepts me foolish and free
all I want is a room up there
and you in it
and even the traffic halt so thick is a way
for people to rub up against each other
and when their surgical appliances lock
they stay together
for the rest of the day (what a day)
I go by to check a slide and I say
that painting's not so blue

where's Lana Turner
she's out eating
and Garbo's backstage at the Met
everyone's taking their coat off
so they can show a rib-cage to the rib-watchers
and the park's full of dancers with their tights and shoes
in little bags
who are often mistaken for worker-outers at the West Side Y
why not
the Pittsburgh Pirates shout because they won
and in a sense we're all winning
we're alive

the apartment was vacated by a gay couple
who moved to the country for fun
they moved a day too soon
even the stabbings are helping the population explosion
though in the wrong country
and all those liars have left the UN
the Seagram Building's no longer rivalled in interest
not that we need liquor (we just like it)

and the little box is out on the sidewalk
next to the delicatessen
so the old man can sit on it and drink beer
and get knocked off it by his wife later in the day
while the sun is still shining

oh god it's wonderful
to get out of bed
and drink too much coffee
and smoke too many cigarettes
and love you so much 

 

My Heart

I'm not going to cry all the time
nor shall I laugh all the time,
I don't prefer one "strain" to another.
I'd have the immediacy of a bad movie,
not just a sleeper, but also the big,
overproduced first-run kind. I want to be
at least as alive as the vulgar. And if
some aficionado of my mess says "That's
not like Frank!", all to the good! I
don't wear brown and grey suits all the time,
do I? No. I wear workshirts to the opera,
often. I want my feet to be bare,
I want my face to be shaven, and my heart--
you can't plan on the heart, but
the better part of it, my poetry, is open.

 

Meditations in an Emergency

Am I to become profligate as if I were a blonde? Or religious as if I were French?

Each time my heart is broken it makes me feel more adventurous (and how the same names keep recurring on that interminable list!), but one of these days there'll be nothing left with which to venture forth.

Why should I share you? Why don't you get rid of someone else for a change?

I am the least difficult of men. All I want is boundless love.

Even trees understand me! Good heavens, I lie under them, too, don't I? I'm just like a pile of leaves.

However, I have never clogged myself with the praises of pastoral life, nor with nostalgia for an innocent past of perverted acts in pastures. No. One need never leave the confines of New York to get all the greenery one wishes--I can't even enjoy a blade of grass unless i know there's a subway
handy, or a record store or some other sign that people do not totally _regret_ life. It is more important to affirm the least sincere; the clouds get enough attention as it is and even they continue to pass. Do they know what they're missing? Uh huh.

My eyes are vague blue, like the sky, and change all the time; they are indiscriminate but fleeting, entirely specific and disloyal, so that no one trusts me. I am always looking away. Or again at something after it has given me up. It makes me restless and that makes me unhappy, but I cannot keep them
still. If only i had grey, green, black, brown, yellow eyes; I would stay at home and do something. It's not that I'm curious. On the contrary, I am bored but it's my duty to be attentive, I am needed by things as the sky must be above the earth. And lately, so great has _their_ anxiety become, I can
spare myself little sleep.

Now there is only one man I like to kiss when he is unshaven. Heterosexuality! you are inexorably approaching. (How best discourage her?)

St. Serapion, I wrap myself in the robes of your whiteness which is like midnight in Dostoevsky. How I am to become a legend, my dear? I've tried love, but that holds you in the bosom of another and I'm always springing forth from it like the lotus--the ecstasy of always bursting forth! (but one must
not be distracted by it!) or like a hyacinth, "to keep the filth of life away," yes, even in the heart, where the filth is pumped in and slanders and pollutes and determines. I will my will, though I may become famous for a mysterious vacancy in that department, that greenhouse.

Destroy yourself, if you don't know!

It is easy to be beautiful; it is difficult to appear so. I admire you, beloved, for the trap you've set. It's like a final chapter no one reads because the plot is over.

"Fanny Brown is run away--scampered off with a Cornet of Horse; I do love that little Minx, & hope She may be happy, tho' She has vexed me by this exploit a little too.--Poor silly Cecchina! or F:B: as we used to call her.--I wish She had a good Whipping and 10,000 pounds."--Mrs. Thrale

I've got to get out of here. I choose a piece of shawl and my dirtiest suntans. I'll be back, I'll re-emerge, defeated, from the valley; you don't want me to go where you go, so I go where you don't want me to. It's only afternoon, there's a lot ahead. There won't be any mail downstairs. Turning, I spit in
the lock and the knob turns.

 

On Seeing Larry Rivers' "Washington Crossing the Delaware" at the Museum of Modern Art

Now that our hero has come back to us
in his white pants and we know his nose
trembling like a flag under fire,
we see the calm cold river is supporting
our forces, the beautiful history.

To be more revolutionary than a nun
is our desire, to be secular and intimate
as, when sighting a redcoat, you smile
and pull the trigger. Anxieties
and animosities, flaming and feeding

on theoretical considerations and
the jealous spiritualities of the abstract
the robot? they're smoke, billows above
the physical event. They have burned up.
See how free we are! as a nation of persons.

Dear father of our country, so alive
you must have lied incessantly to be
immediate, here are your bones crossed
on my breast like a rusty flintlock,
a pirate's flag, bravely specific

and ever so light in the misty glare
of a crossing by water in winter to a shore
other than that the bridge reaches for.
Don't shoot until, the white of freedom glinting
on your gun barrel, you see the general fear.

A True Account of Talking to the Sun on Fire Island


The Sun woke me this morning loud 
and clear, saying "Hey! I've been 
trying to wake you up for fifteen 
minutes. Don't be so rude, you are 
only the second poet I've ever chosen 
to speak to personally

so why
aren't you more attentive? If I could 
burn you through the window I would 
to wake you up. I can't hang around 
here all day."

"Sorry, Sun, I stayed
up late last night talking to Hal."

"When I woke up Mayakovsky he was 
a lot more prompt" the Sun said 
petulantly. "Most people are up 
already waiting to see if I'm going 
to put in an appearance."

I tried
to apologize "I missed you yesterday."
"That's better" he said. "I didn't 
know you'd come out." "You may be 
wondering why I've come so close?" 
"Yes" I said beginning to feel hot 
wondering if maybe he wasn't burning me 
anyway.

"Frankly I wanted to tell you 
I like your poetry. I see a lot 
on my rounds and you're okay. You may 
not be the greatest thing on earth, but 
you're different. Now, I've heard some 
say you're crazy, they being excessively 
calm themselves to my mind, and other 
crazy poets think that you're a boring 
reactionary. Not me.

Just keep on 
like I do and pay no attention. You'll 
find that people always will complain 
about the atmosphere, either too hot 
or too cold too bright or too dark, days
too short or too long.

If you don't appear
at all one day they think you're lazy
or dead. Just keep right on, I like it.

And don't worry about your lineage 
poetic or natural. The Sun shines on 
the jungle, you know, on the tundra 
the sea, the ghetto. Wherever you were 
I knew it and saw you moving. I was waiting 
for you to get to work.

And now that you 
are making your own days, so to speak, 
even if no one reads you but me 
you won't be depressed. Not 
everyone can look up, even at me. It 
hurts their eyes."
"Oh Sun, I'm so grateful to you!"

"Thanks and remember I'm watching. It's 
easier for me to speak to you out 
here. I don't have to slide down 
between buildings to get your ear. 
I know you love Manhattan, but 
you ought to look up more often.

And
always embrace things, people earth 
sky stars, as I do, freely and with 
the appropriate sense of space. That 
is your inclination, known in the heavens 
and you should follow it to hell, if 
necessary, which I doubt.

Maybe we'll 
speak again in Africa, of which I too 
am specially fond. Go back to sleep now 
Frank, and I may leave a tiny poem 
in that brain of yours as my farewell."

"Sun, don't go!" I was awake
at last. "No, go I must, they're calling
me."
"Who are they?"

Rising he said "Some
day you'll know. They're calling to you
too." Darkly he rose, and then I slept.

Ann Arbor Variations


Wet heat drifts through the afternoon
like a campus dog, a fraternity ghost
waiting to stay home from football games.
The arches are empty clear to the sky.

Except for the leaves: those lashes of our
thinking and dreaming and drinking sight.
The spherical radiance, the Old English
look, the sum of our being, "hath perced

to the roote" all our springs and falls
and now rolls over our limpness, a daily
dragon. We lose our health in a love
of color, drown in a fountain of myriads,

as simply as children. It is too hot,
our birth was given up to screaming. Our
life on these street lawns seems silent.
The leaves chatter their comparisons

to the wind and the sky fills up
before we are out of bed. O infinite
our siestas! adobe effigies in a land
that is sick of us and our tanned flesh.

The wind blows towards us particularly
the sobbing of our dear friends on both
coasts. We are sick of living and afraid
that death will not be by water, o sea.

2
Along the walks and shaded ways
pregnant women look snidely at children.
Two weeks ago they were told, in these

selfsame pools of trefoil, "the market
for emeralds is collapsing," "chlorophyll
shines in your eyes," "the sea's misery

is progenitor of the dark moss which hides
on the north side of trees and cries."
What do they think of slim kids now?

and how, when the summer's gong of day
and night slithers towards their sweat
and towards the nest of their arms

and thighs, do they feel about children
whose hides are pearly with days of swimming?
Do they mistake these fresh drops for tears?

The wind works over these women constantly!
trying, perhaps, to curdle their milk
or make their spring unseasonably fearful,

season they face with dread and bright eyes,
The leaves, wrinkled or shiny like apples,
wave women courage and sigh, a void temperature.

3
The alternatives of summer do not remove
us from this place. The fainting into skies
from a diving board, the express train to
Detroit's damp bars, the excess of affection
on the couch near an open window or a Bauhaus
fire escape, the lazy regions of stars, all
are strangers. Like Mayakovsky read on steps
of cool marble, or Yeats danced in a theatre
of polite music. The classroon day of dozing
and grammar, the partial eclipse of the head
in the row in front of the head of poplars,
sweet Syrinx! last out the summer in a stay
of iron. Workmen loiter before urinals, stare
out windows at girders tightly strapped to clouds.
And in the morning we whimper as we cook
an egg, so far from fluttering sands and azure!

4
The violent No! of the sun
burns the forehead of hills.
Sand fleas arrive from Salt Lake
and most of the theatres close.

The leaves roll into cigars, or
it seems our eyes stick together
in sleep. O forest, o brook of
spice, o cool gaze of strangers!

the city tumbles towards autumn
in a convulsion of tourists
and teachers. We dance in the dark,
forget the anger of what we blame

on the day. Children toss and murmur
as a rumba blankets their trees and
beckons their stars closer, older, now.
We move o'er the world, being so much here.

It's as if Poseidon left off counting
his waters for a moment! In the fields
the silence is music like the moon.
The bullfrogs sleep in their hairy caves.

across the avenue a trefoil lamp
of the streets tosses luckily.
The leaves, finally, love us! and
moonrise! we die upon the sun.

A City Winter

1
I understand the boredom of the clerks
fatigue shifting like dunes within their eyes
a frightful nausea gumming up the works
that once was thought aggression in disguise.
Do you remember? then how lightly dead
seemed the moon when over factories
it languid slid like a barrage of lead
above the heart, the fierce inventories
of desire. Now women wander our dreams
carrying money and to our sleep's shame
our hands twitch not for swift blood-sunk triremes
nor languorous white horses nor ill fame,
but clutch the groin that clouds a pallid sky
where tow'rs are sinking in their common eye.

2
My ship is flung upon the gutter's wrist
and cries for help of storm to violate
that flesh your curiosity too late
has flushed. The stem your garter tongue would twist
has sunk upon the waveless bosom's mist,
thigh of the city, apparition, hate,
and the tower whose doves have, delicate,
fled into my blood where they are not kissed.

You have left me to the sewer's meanwhile,
and I have answered the sea's open wish
to love me as a bonfire's watchful hand
guards red the shore and guards the hairy strand,
our most elegant lascivious bile,
my ship sinking beneath the gutter's fish.

3
How can I then, my dearest winter lay,
disgorge the tasty worm that eats me up
falling onto the stem of a highway
whose ardent rainbow is the spoon's flat cup
and in the vilest of blue suited force
enamored of the heated needle's arm
finds the ministrant an own tongue's remorse
so near the blood and still so far from harm,
thus to be eaten up and gobbled down
volcanoes of speedometers, the strike
that heats the iris into flame and flow'rs
the panting chalice so a turning pike:
you are not how the gods refused to die,
and I am scarred forever neath the eye.

4
What are my eyes? if they must feed me, rank
with forgetting, in the jealous forest
of lustrous blows, so luminously blank
through smoke and in the light. All faint, at rest,
yet I am racing towards the fear that kills
them off, friends and lovers, hast'ning through tears
like alcohol high in the throat of hills
and hills of night, alluring! their black cheers
falling upon my ears like nails. And there
the bars grow thick with onanists and camps
and bivouacs of bears with clubs, are fair
with their blows, deal death beneath purple lamps
and to me! I run! closer always move,
crying my name in fields of dead I love.

5
I plunge deep within this frozen lake
whose mirrored fastnesses fill up my heart,
where tears drift from frivolity to art
all white and slobbering, and by mistake
are the sky. I'm no whale to cruise apart
in fields impassive of my stench, my sake,
my sign to crushing seas that fall like fake
pillars to crash! to sow as wake my heart

and don't be niggardly. The snow drifts low
and yet neglects to cover me, and I
dance just ahead to keep my heart in sight.
How like a queen, to seek with jealous eye
the face that flees you, hidden city, white
swan. There's no art to free me, blinded so.



Fifteen

South of the bridge on Seventeenth
I found back of the willows one summer
day a motorcycle with engine running
as it lay on its side, ticking over
slowly in the high grass. I was fifteen.

I admired all that pulsing gleam, the
shiny flanks, the demure headlights
fringed where it lay; I led it gently
to the road and stood with that
companion, ready and friendly. I was fifteen.

We could find the end of a road, meet
the sky on out Seventeenth. I thought about
hills, and patting the handle got back a 
confident opinion. On the bridge we indulged
a forward feeling, a tremble. I was fifteen.

Thinking, back farther in the grass I found
the owner, just coming to, where he had flipped
over the rail. He had blood on his hand, was pale—
I helped him walk to his machine. He ran his hand
over it, called me good man, roared away.

I stood there, fifteen.

 

Traveling Through the Dark

Traveling through the dark I found a deer
dead on the edge of the Wilson River road.
It is usually best to roll them into the canyon:
that road is narrow; to swerve might make more dead.

By glow of the tail-light I stumbled back of the car
and stood by the heap, a doe, a recent killing;
she had stiffened already, almost cold.
I dragged her off; she was large in the belly.

My fingers touching her side brought me the reason—
her side was warm; her fawn lay there waiting,
alive, still, never to be born.
Beside that mountain road I hesitated.

The car aimed ahead its lowered parking lights;
under the hood purred the steady engine.
I stood in the glare of the warm exhaust turning red;
around our group I could hear the wilderness listen.

I thought hard for us all—my only swerving—,
then pushed her over the edge into the river.

 

One Home

Mine was a Midwest home—you can keep your world.
Plain black hats rode the thoughts that made our code.
We sang hymns in the house; the roof was near God.

The light bulb that hung in the pantry made a wan light,
but we could read by it the names of preserves—
outside, the buffalo grass, and the wind in the night.

A wildcat sprang at Grandpa on the Fourth of July
when he was cutting plum bushes for fuel,
before Indians pulled the West over the edge of the sky.

To anyone who looked at us we said, "My friend";
liking the cut of a thought, we could say "Hello."
(But plain black hats rode the thoughts that made our code.)

The sun was over our town; it was like a blade.
Kicking cottonwood leaves we ran toward storms.
Wherever we looked the land would hold us up.

 

A Family Turn

All her Kamikaze friends admired my aunt,
their leader, charmed in vinegar,
a woman who could blaze with such white blasts
as Lawrence's that lit Arabia.
Her mean opinions bent her hatpins.

We'd take a ride in her old car
that ripped like Sherman through society:
Main Street's oases sheltered no one
when she pulled up at Thirty-first
and whirled that Ford for another charge.

We swept headlines from under rugs, names
all over town, which I learned her way, by heart,
and blazed with love that burns because it's real.
With a turn that's our family's own,
she'd say, "Our town is not the same"—

Pause—"And it's never been."



Topography
After we flew across the country we got in bed, laid our bodies delicately together, like maps laid face to face, East to West, my San Francisco against your New York, your Fire Island against my Sonoma, my  New Orleans deep in your Texas, your Idaho bright on my Great Lakes, my Kansas  burning against your Kansas your Kansas burning against my Kansas, your Eastern Standard Time pressing into my  Pacific Time, my Mountain Time beating against your Central Time, your  sun rising swiftly from the right my  sun rising swiftly from the left your  moon rising slowly from the left my  moon rising slowly from the right until  all four bodies of the sky burn above us, sealing us together,  all our cities twin cities,  all our states united, one  nation, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.

The Race   
When I got to the airport I rushed up to the desk,  bought a ticket, ten minutes later  they told me the flight was cancelled, the doctors  had said my father would not live through the night  and the flight was cancelled. A young man  with a dark brown moustache told me  another airline had a nonstop  leaving in seven minutes. See that  elevator over there, well go  down to the first floor, make a right, you'll  see a yellow bus, get off at the  second Pan Am terminal, I  ran, I who have no sense of direction  raced exactly where he'd told me, a fish  slipping upstream deftly against  the flow of the river. I jumped off that bus with those  bags I had thrown everything into  in five minutes, and ran, the bags  wagged me from side to side as if  to prove I was under the claims of the material,  I ran up to a man with a flower on his breast,  I who always go to the end of the line, I said  Help me. He looked at my ticket, he said  Make a left and then a right, go up the moving stairs and then  run. I lumbered up the moving stairs,  at the top I saw the corridor,  and then I took a deep breath, I said  goodbye to my body, goodbye to comfort,  I used my legs and heart as if I would  gladly use them up for this,  to touch him again in this life. I ran, and the  bags banged against me, wheeled and coursed  in skewed orbits, I have seen pictures of  women running, their belongings tied  in scarves grasped in their fists, I blessed my  long legs he gave me, my strong  heart I abandoned to its own purpose,  I ran to Gate 17 and they were  just lifting the thick white  lozenge of the door to fit it into  the socket of the plane. Like the one who is not  too rich, I turned sideways and  slipped through the needle's eye, and then  I walked down the aisle toward my father. The jet  was full, and people's hair was shining, they were  smiling, the interior of the plane was filled with a  mist of gold endorphin light,  I wept as people weep when they enter heaven,  in massive relief. We lifted up  gently from one tip of the continent  and did not stop until we set down lightly on the  other edge, I walked into his room  and watched his chest rise slowly  and sink again, all night  I watched him breathe. 

Sex Without Love 
How do they do it, the ones who make love without love? Beautiful as dancers, gliding over each other like ice-skaters over the ice, fingers hooked inside each other's bodies, faces red as steak, wine, wet as the children at birth whose mothers are going to give them away. How do they come to the come to the come to the God come to the still waters, and not love the one who came there with them, light rising slowly as steam off their joined skin? These are the true religious, the purists, the pros, the ones who will not accept a false Messiah, love the priest instead of the God. They do not mistake the lover for their own pleasure, they are like great runners: they know they are alone with the road surface, the cold, the wind, the fit of their shoes, their over-all cardio- vascular health--just factors, like the partner in the bed, and not the truth, which is the single body alone in the universe against its own best time.
 
I Go Back to May 1937 
I see them standing at the formal gates of their colleges,  I see my father strolling out under the ochre sandstone arch, the  red tiles glinting like bent  plates of blood behind his head, I  see my mother with a few light books at her hip  standing at the pillar made of tiny bricks with the  wrought-iron gate still open behind her, its  sword-tips black in the May air, they are about to graduate, they are about to get married,  they are kids, they are dumb, all they know is they are innocent, they would never hurt anybody. I want to go up to them and say Stop,  don't do it—she's the wrong woman,  he's the wrong man, you are going to do things  you cannot imagine you would ever do,  you are going to do bad things to children, you are going to suffer in ways you never heard of,  you are going to want to die. I want to go  up to them there in the late May sunlight and say it, her hungry pretty blank face turning to me, her pitiful beautiful untouched body,  his arrogant handsome blind face turning to me, his pitiful beautiful untouched body, but I don't do it. I want to live. I  take them up like the male and female  paper dolls and bang them together  at the hips like chips of flint as if to  strike sparks from them, I say Do what you are going to do, and I will tell about it. 
 
What is the Earth?
The earth is a homeless person. Or the earth's home is the atmosphere. Or the atmosphere is the earth's clothing, layers of it, the earth wears all of it, the earth is a homeless person. Or the atmosphere is the earth's cocoon, which it spun itself, the earth is a larvum. Or the atmosphere is the earth's skin— earth, and atmostphere, one homeless one. Or its orbit is the earth's home, or the path of the orbit just a path, the earth, a homeless person. Or the gutter of the earth's orbit is a circle of hell, the circle of the homeless. But the earth has a place, around the fire, the hearth of our star, the earth is at home, the earth is home to the homeless. For food, and warmth, and shelter, and health, they have earth and fire and air and water, for home they have the elements they are made of, as if each homeless one were an earth, made of milk and grain, like Ceres, and one could eat oneself—as if the human were a god, who could eat the earth, a god of homelessness. 
 
  
High School Senior
For seventeen years, her breath in the house  at night, puff, puff, like summer  cumulus above her bed,  and her scalp smelling of apricots —this being who had formed within me,  squatted like a bright tree-frog in the dark,  like an eohippus she had come out of history  slowly, through me, into the daylight,  I had the daily sight of her,  like food or air she was there, like a mother.  I say "college," but I feel as if I cannot tell the difference between her leaving for college  and our parting forever—I try to see this house without her, without her pure  depth of feeling, without her creek-brown hair, her daedal hands with their tapered  fingers, her pupils dark as the mourning cloak's wing, but I can't. Seventeen years ago, in this room, she moved inside me, I looked at the river, I could not imagine  my life with her. I gazed across the street,  and saw, in the icy winter sun, a column of steam rush up away from the earth.  There are creatures whose children float away  at birth, and those who throat-feed their young for weeks and never see them again. My daughter  is free and she is in me—no, my love  of her is in me, moving in my heart,  changing chambers, like something poured  from hand to hand, to be weighed and then reweighed.
 
Take the I Out 
But I love the I, steel I-beam  that my father sold. They poured the pig iron  into the mold, and it fed out slowly,  a bending jelly in the bath, and it hardened,  Bessemer, blister, crucible, alloy, and he  marketed it, and bought bourbon, and Cream  of Wheat, its curl of butter right  in the middle of its forehead, he paid for our dresses  with his metal sweat, sweet in the morning  and sour in the evening. I love the I,  frail between its flitches, its hard ground  and hard sky, it soars between them  like the soul that rushes, back and forth,  between the mother and father. What if they had loved each other,  how would it have felt to be the strut  joining the floor and roof of the truss?  I have seen, on his shirt-cardboard, years  in her desk, the night they made me, the penciled  slope of her temperature rising, and on  the peak of the hill, first soldier to reach  the crest, the Roman numeral I— I, I, I, I,  girders of identity, head on,  embedded in the poem. I love the I  for its premise of existence—our I—when I was  born, part gelid, I lay with you  on the cooling table, we were all there, a  forest of felled iron. The I is a pine,  resinous, flammable root to crown,  which throws its cones as far as it can in a fire.
 
1954
Then dirt scared me, because of the dirt he had put on her face. And her training bra scared me—the newspapers, morning and evening, kept saying it, training bra, as if the cups of it had been calling the breasts up—he buried her in it, perhaps he had never bothered to take it off. They found her underpants in a garbage can. And I feared the word eczema, like my acne and like the X in the paper which marked her body, as if he had killed her for not being flawless. I feared his name, Burton Abbott, the first name that was a last name, as if he were not someone specific. It was nothing one could learn from his face. His face was dull and ordinary, it took away what I’d thought I could count on about evil. He looked thin and lonely, it was horrifying, he looked almost humble. I felt awe that dirt was so impersonal, and pity for the training bra, pity and terror of eczema. And I could not sit on my mother’s electric blanket anymore, I began to have a  fear of electricity— the good people, the parents, were going to fry him to death. This was what his parents had been telling us: Burton Abbott, Burton Abbott, death to the person, death to the home planet. The worst thing was to think of her, of what it had been to be her, alive, to be walked, alive, into that cabin, to look into those eyes, and see the human
 
Crab
When I eat crab, slide the rosy rubbery claw across my tongue I think of my mother. She'd drive down to the edge of the Bay, tiny woman in a huge car, she'd ask the crab-man to crack it for her. She'd stand and wait as the pliers broke those chalky homes, wild- red and knobby, those cartilage wrists, the thin orange roof of the back. I'd come home, and find her at the table crisply unhousing the parts, laying the fierce shell on one side, the soft body on the other. She gave us lots, because we loved it so much, so there was always enough, a mound of crab like a cross between breast-milk and meat. The back even had the shape of a perfect ruined breast, upright flakes white as the flesh of a chrysanthemum, but the best part was the claw, she'd slide it out so slowly the tip was unbroken, scarlet bulb of the feeler—it was such a kick to easily eat that weapon, wreck its delicate hooked pulp between palate and tongue. She loved to feed us and all she gave us was fresh, she was willing to grasp shell, membrane, stem, to go close to dirt and salt to feed us, the way she had gone near our father himself to give us life. I look back and see us dripping at the table, feeding, her row of pink eaters, the platter of flawless limp claws, I look back further and see her in the kitchen, shelling flesh, her small hands curled—she is like a fish-hawk, wild, tearing the meat deftly, living out her life of fear and desire. 
 
May 1968 
When the Dean said we could not cross campus until the students gave up the buildings, we lay down, in the street, we said the cops will enter this gate over us. Lying back on the cobbles, I saw the buildings of New York City from dirt level, they soared up and stopped, chopped off--above them, the sky, the night air over the island. The mounted police moved, near us, while we sang, and then I began to count, 12, 13, 14, 15, I counted again, 15, 16, one month since the day on that deserted beach, 17, 18, my mouth fell open, my hair on the street, if my period did not come tonight I was pregnant. I could see the sole of a cop's shoe, the gelding's belly, its genitals-- if they took me to Women's Detention and did the exam on me, the speculum, the fingers--I gazed into the horse's tail like a comet-train. All week, I had thought about getting arrested, half-longed to give myself away. On the tar-- one brain in my head, another, in the making, near the base of my tail-- I looked at the steel arc of the horse's shoe, the curve of its belly, the cop's nightstick, the buildings streaming up away from the earth. I knew I should get up and leave, but I lay there looking at the space above us, until it turned deep blue and then ashy, colorless, Give me this one night, I thought, and I'll give this child the rest of my life, the horse's heads, this time, drooping, dipping, until they slept in a circle around my body and my daughter 
 
One Year 
When I got to his marker, I sat on it, like sitting on the edge of someone's bed  and I rubbed the smooth, speckled granite. I took some tears from my jaw and neck and started to wash a corner of his stone. Then a black and amber ant ran out onto the granite, and off it, and another ant hauled a dead ant onto the stone, leaving it, and not coming back. Ants ran down into the grooves of his name and dates, down into the oval track of the  first name's O, middle name's O, the short O of his last name, and down into the hyphen between his birth and death--little trough of his life. Soft bugs appeared on my shoes, like grains of pollen, I let them move on me, I rinsed a dark fleck of mica, and down inside the engraved letters the first dots of lichen were appearing like stars in early evening. I saw the speedwell on the ground with its horns, the coiled ferns, copper-beech blossoms, each petal like that disc of matter which swayed, on the last day, on his tongue. Tamarack, Western hemlock, manzanita, water birch with its scored bark, I put my arms around a trunk and squeezed it, then I lay down on my father's grave. The sun shone down on me, the powerful ants walked on me. When I woke, my cheek was crumbly, yellowish  with a mustard plaster of earth. Only at the last minute did I think of his body actually under me, the can of  bone, ash, soft as a goosedown pillow that bursts in bed with the lovers. When I kissed his stone it was not enough, when I licked it my tongue went dry a moment, I  ate his dust, I tasted my dirt host.
 
Primitive 
I have heard about the civilized,  the marriages run on talk, elegant and honest, rational. But you and I are  savages. You come in with a bag,  hold it out to me in silence.  I know Moo Shu Pork when I smell it  and understand the message: I have  pleased you greatly last night. We sit  quietly, side by side, to eat,  the long pancakes dangling and spilling,  fragrant sauce dripping out,  and glance at each other askance, wordless,  the corners of our eyes clear as spear points  laid along the sill to show  a friend sits with a friend here. 
 
The Victims 
When Mother divorced you, we were glad. She took it and took it in silence, all those years and then kicked you out, suddenly, and her kids loved it. Then you were fired, and we grinned inside, the way people grinned when Nixon's helicopter lifted off the South Lawn for the last time. We were tickled to think of your office taken away,  your secretaries taken away,  your lunches with three double bourbons,  your pencils, your reams of paper. Would they take your suits back, too, those dark carcasses hung in your closet, and the black noses of your shoes with their large pores?  She had taught us to take it, to hate you and take it until we pricked with her for your  annihilation, Father. Now I pass the bums in doorways, the white slugs of their bodies gleaming through slits in their suits of compressed silt, the stained flippers of their hands, the underwater fire of their eyes, ships gone down with the lanterns lit, and I wonder who took it and  took it from them in silence until they had given it all away and had nothing  left but this. 
 
The Pope's Penis 
It hangs deep in his robes, a delicate clapper at the center of a bell. It moves when he moves, a ghostly fish in a halo of silver sweaweed, the hair swaying in the dark and the heat -- and at night while his eyes sleep, it stands up in praise of God.
 
The Space Heater 
On the then-below-zero day, it was on, near the patients' chair, the old heater kept by the analyst's couch, at the end, like the infant's headstone that was added near the foot of my father's grave. And it was hot, with the almost laughing satire of a fire's heat, the little coils like hairs in Hell. And it was making a group of sick noises- I wanted the doctor to turn it off but I couldn't seem to ask, so I just stared, but it did not budge. The doctor turned his heavy, soft palm outward, toward me, inviting me to speak, I said, "If you're cold-are you cold? But if it's on  for me..." He held his palm out toward me, I tried to ask, but I only muttered, but he said, "Of course," as if I had asked, and he stood up and approached the heater, and then stood on one foot, and threw himself toward the wall with one hand, and with the other hand reached down, behind the couch, to pull the plug out. I looked away, I had not known he would have to bend like that. And I was so moved, that he would act undignified, to help me, that I cried, not trying to stop, but as if the moans made sentences which bore some human message. If he would cast himself toward the outlet for me, as if bending with me in my old shame and horror, then I would rest on his art-and the heater purred, like a creature or the familiar of a creature, or the child of a familiar, the father of a child, the spirit of a father, the healing of a spirit, the vision of healing, the heat of vision, the power of heat, the pleasure of power. 

  The Slash 
The first ones were attached to my dress at the waist, one on either side, right at the point where hands could clasp you and pick you up, as if you were a hot squeeze bottle of tree syrup, and the sashes that emerged like axil buds from the angles of the waist were used to play horses, that racing across the cement while someone held your reins and you could feel your flesh itself in your body wildly streaming. You would come home, a torn-off sash dangling from either hand, a snake-charmer— each time, she sewed them back on with thicker thread, until the seams of sash and dress bulged like little knots of gristle at your waist as you walked, you could feel them like thumbs pressing into your body. The next sash was the one Thee, Hannah! borrowed from her be-ribboned friend and hid in a drawer and got salve on it, salve on a sash, like bacon grease on a snake, God's lard on the ribbon a Quaker girl should not want, Satan's jism on silk delicate as the skin of a young girl's genital. When Hannah gave up satin her father told her she was beautiful just as God made her. But all sashes lead to the sash, very sash of very sash, begotten, not made, that my aunt sent from Switzerland— cobalt ripple of Swiss cotton with clean boys and girls dancing on it. I don't know why my mother chose it to tie me to the chair with, her eye just fell on it, but the whole day I felt those blue children dance around my wrists. Later someone told me they had found out the universe is a kind of strip that twists around and joins itself, and I believe it, sometimes I can feel it, the way we are pouring slowly toward a curve and around it through something dark and soft, and we are bound to each other.    


The Mortal One 
Three months after he lies dead, that long yellow narrow body, not like Christ but like one of his saints, the naked ones in the paintings whose bodies are done in gilt, all knees and raw ribs, the ones who died of nettles, bile, the one who died roasted over a slow fire— three months later I take the pot of tulip bulbs out of the closet and set it on the table and take off the foil hood. The shoots stand up like young green pencils, and there in the room is the comfortable smell of rot, the bulb that did not make it, marked with ridges like an elephant's notched foot, I walk down the hall as if I were moving through the long stem of the tulip toward the closed sheath. In the kitchen I throw a palmful of peppercorns into the saucepan as if I would grow a black tree from the soup, I throw out the rotten chicken part, glad again that we burned my father before one single bloom of mold could grow up out of him, maybe it had begun in his bowels but we burned his bowels the way you burn the long blue scarf of the dead, and all their clothing, cleansing with fire. How fast time goes now that I'm happy, now that I know how to think of his dead body every day without shock, almost without grief, to take it into each part of the day the way a loom parts the vertical threads, half to the left half to the right like the Red Sea and you throw the shuttle through with the warp-thread attached to the feet, that small gold figure of my father— how often I saw him in paintings and did not know him, the tiny naked dead one in the corner, the mortal one. 
 
The Daughter Goes to Camp 
In the taxi alone, home from the airport, I could not believe you were gone. My palm kept creeping over the smooth plastic to find your strong meaty little hand and squeeze it, find your narrow thigh in the noble ribbing of the corduroy, straight and regular as anything in nature, to find the slack cool cheek of a child in the heat of a summer morning— nothing, nothing, waves of bawling hitting me in hot flashes like some change of life, some boiling wave rising in me toward your body, toward where it should have been on the seat, your brow curved like a cereal bowl, your eyes dark with massed crystals like the magnified scales of a butterfly's wing, the delicate feelers of your limp hair, floods of blood rising in my face as I tried to reassemble the hot gritty molecules in the car, to make you appear like a holograph on the back seat, pull you out of nothing as I once did—but you were really gone, the cab glossy as a slit caul out of which you had slipped, the air glittering electric with escape as it does in the room at a birth. 
  The Arrivals
I pull the bed slowly open, I open the lips of the bed, get the stack of fresh underpants out of the suitcase—peach, white, cherry, quince, pussy willow, I choose a color and put them on, I travel with the stack for the stack's caress, dry and soft. I enter the soft birth-lips of the bed, take off my glasses, and the cabbage-roses on the curtain blur to Keats's peonies, the ochre willow holds a cloud the way a skeleton holds flesh and it passes, does not hold it. The bed fits me like a walnut shell its meat, my hands touch the upper corners, the lower, my feet. It is so silent I hear the choirs of wild silence, the maenads of the atoms. Is this what it feels like to have a mother? The sheets are heavy cream, whipped. Ah, here is my mother, or rather here she is not, so this is paradise. But surely that was paradise, when her Jell-O nipple was the size of my own fist, in front of my face—out of its humped runkles those several springs of milk, so fierce almost fearsome. What did I think in that brain gridded for thought, its cups loaded with languageless rennet? And at night, when they timed me, four hours of screaming, not a minute more, four, those quatrains of icy yell, then the cold tap water to get me over my shameless hunger, what was it like to be there when that hunger was driven into my structure at such heat it alloyed that iron? Where have I been while this person is leading my life with her patience, will and order? In the garden; on the bee and under the bee; in the crown gathering cumulus and flensing it from the boughs, weeping a rehearsal for the rotting and casting off of our flesh, the year we slowly throw it off like clothing by the bed covers of our lover, and dive under. 
 
The Borders
To say that she came into me, from another world, is not true. Nothing comes into the universe and nothing leaves it. My mother—I mean my daughter did not enter me. She began to exist inside me—she appeared within me. And my mother did not enter me. When she lay down, to pray, on me, she was always ferociously courteous, fastidious with Puritan fastidiousness, but the barrier of my skin failed, the barrier of my body fell, the barrier of my spirit. She aroused and magnetized my skin, I wanted ardently to please her, I would say to her what she wanted to hear, as if I were hers. I served her willingly, and then became very much like her, fiercely out for myself. When my daughter was in me, I felt I had a soul in me. But it was born with her. But when she cried, one night, such pure crying, I said I will take care of you, I will put you first. I will not ever have a daughter the way she had me, I will not ever swim in you the way my mother swam in me and I felt myself swum in. I will never know anyone again the way I knew my mother, the gates of the human fallen.
 The Clasp 
She was four, he was one, it was raining, we had colds, we had been in the apartment two weeks straight, I grabbed her to keep her from shoving him over on his face, again, and when I had her wrist in my grasp I compressed it, fiercely, for a couple of seconds, to make an impression on her, to hurt her, our beloved firstborn, I even almost savored the stinging sensation of the squeezing, the expression, into her, of my anger, "Never, never, again," the righteous chant accompanying the clasp. It happened very fast-grab, crush, crush, crush, release-and at the first extra force, she swung her head, as if checking who this was, and looked at me, and saw me-yes, this was her mom, her mom was doing this. Her dark, deeply open eyes took me in, she knew me, in the shock of the moment she learned me. This was her mother, one of the two whom she most loved, the two who loved her most, near the source of love  was this.
 
The End 
 
The Pact
We played dolls in that house where Father staggered with the Thanksgiving knife, where Mother wept at noon into her one ounce of cottage cheese, praying for the strength not to kill herself. We kneeled over the rubber bodies, gave them baths carefully, scrubbed their little orange hands, wrapped them up tight, said goodnight, never spoke of the woman like a gaping wound weeping on the stairs, the man like a stuck buffalo, baffled, stunned, dragging arrows in his side. As if we had made a pact of silence and safety, we kneeled and dressed those tiny torsos with their elegant belly-buttons and minuscule holes high on the buttock to pee through and all that darkness in their open mouths, so that I have not been able to forgive you for giving your daughter away, letting her go at eight as if you took Molly Ann or Tiny Tears and held her head under the water in the bathinette until no bubbles rose, or threw her dark rosy body on the fire that burned in that house where you and I barely survived, sister, where we swore to be protectors.
 

A Week Later

A week later, I said to a friend: I don't think I could ever write about it. Maybe in a year I could write something. There is something in me maybe someday to be written; now it is folded, and folded, and folded, like a note in school. And in my dream someone was playing jacks, and in the air there was a huge, thrown, tilted jack on fire. And when I woke up, I found myself counting the days since I had last seen my husband--only two years, and some weeks, and hours. We had signed the papers and come down to the ground floor of the Chrysler Building, the intact beauty of its lobby around us like a king's tomb, on the ceiling the little painted plane, in the mural, flying. And it entered my strictured heart, this morning, slightly, shyly as if warily, untamed, a greater sense of the sweetness and plenty of his ongoing life, unknown to me, unseen by me, unheard, untouched-but known, seen, heard, touched. And it came to me, for moments at a time, moment after moment, to be glad for him that he is with the one he feels was meant for him. And I thought of my mother, minutes from her death, eighty-five years from her birth, the almost warbler bones of her shoulder under my hand, the eggshell skull, as she lay in some peace in the clean sheets, and I could tell her the best of my poor, partial love, I could sing her out with it, I saw the luck and luxury of that hour.
  Japanese-American Farmhouse, California, 1942
Everything has been taken that anyone thought worth taking. The stairs are tilted, scattered with sycamore leaves curled like ammonites in inland rock. Wood shows through the paint on the frame and the door is open--an empty room, sunlight on the floor. All that is left on the porch is the hollow cylinder of an Albert's Quick Oats cardboard box and a sewing machine. Its extraterrestrial head is bowed, its scrolled neck glistens. I was born, that day, near there, in wartime, of ignorant people. 
 

Your's, Kindly 

Because I felt too weak to move you kindly moved for me, kneeling and turning, until you could take my breast-tip in the socket of your lips; and my womb went down  on itself, drew sharply over and over to its tightest shape, the way, when newborns nurse, the fist of the uterus with each, milk, tug, powerfully shuts. I saw your hand, near me, your daily hand, your thumbnail, the quiet ordinary self, when your mouth at my breast was drawing sweet gashes of come up from my womb made black fork-flashes of a  celibate's lust shoot through me. And I couldn't lift my head, and you swiveled, and came down close to me, delicate blunt touch of your hard penis in long  caresses down my face, species happiness, calm which gleams with fearless anguished desire. It found my pouring mouth, the back of my throat, and the bright wall which opens. It seemed to take us hours to move the bone creatures so their gods could be fitted to each other, and then, at last, home, root in the earth, wing in the air. As it finished, it seemed my sex was a grey flower the color of the brain, smooth and glistening, a complex calla or iris which you  were creating with the errless digit of your sex. But then, as it finished again, one could not speak of a blossom, or the blossom  was stripped away, as if, until that moment, the cunt had been clothed, still, in the thinnest garment, and now was bare or more than bare, silver wet-suit of  matter itself gone, nothing there but the paradise flay. And then more, that cannot be told — may be, but cannot be, things that did not have to do with me, as if some  wires crossed, and history or war, or the witches possessed, or the end of life were happening in me, or as if  I were in a borrowed body, I knew what I could not know, did — was done to — what I cannot-do-be-done-to, so when  we returned, I cried, afraid for a moment I was dead, and had got my wish to come back, once, and sleep with you, on a summer afternoon, in an empty house where no one could hear us. I lowered the salt breasts of my eyes to your lips, and you sucked, then I looked at your face, at its absence of unkindness, its giving that absence off as a matter I cannot name, as if I was seeing not you but something between us, that can live only between us. I stroked back the hair in pond and sex rivulets from your forehead, gently raked it back along your scalp, I did not think of my father's hair in death, those oiled paths, I lay along your length and did not think how he did not love me, how he trained me not to be loved.



Dishwater

 Slap of the screen door, flat knock
of my grandmother’s boxy black shoes
on the wooden stoop, the hush and sweep
of her knob-kneed, cotton-aproned stride
out to the edge and then, toed in
with a furious twist and heave,
a bridge that leaps from her hot red hands
and hangs there shining for fifty years
over the mystified chickens,
over the swaying nettles, the ragweed,
the clay slope down to the creek,
over the redwing blackbirds in the tops
of the willows, a glorious rainbow
with an empty dishpan swinging at one end.

                             
PORCH SWING IN SEPTEMBER
 The porch swing hangs fixed in a morning sun
that bleaches its gray slats, its flowered cushion
whose flowers have faded, like those of summer,
and a small brown spider has hung out her webs
on a line between porch post and chain
so that no one may swing without breaking it.
She is saying it’s time that the swinging were done with,
time that the creaking and pinging and popping
that sang through the ceiling were past,
time now for the soft vibrations of moths,
the wasp tapping each board for an entrance,
the cool dewdrops to brush from her work
every morning, one world at a time.      


A Room in the Past 

It’s a kitchen. Its curtains fill 
with a morning light so bright 
you can’t see beyond its windows 
into the afternoon. A kitchen 
falling through time with its things 
in their places, the dishes jingling 
up in the cupboard, the bucket 



Cuba, 1962 
When the rooster jumps up on the windowsill  and spreads his red-gold wings,  I wake, thinking it is the sun  and call Juanita, hearing her answer,  but only in my mind.  I know she is already outside,  breaking the cane off at ground level,  using only her big hands.  I get the machete and walk among the cane,  until I see her, lying face-down in the dirt. 
Juanita, dead in the morning like this.  I raise the machete— what I take from the earth, I give back— and cut off her feet.  I lift the body and carry it to the wagon,  where I load the cane to sell in the village.  Whoever tastes my woman in his candy, his cake,  tastes something sweeter than this sugar cane;  it is grief.  If you eat too much of it, you want more,  you can never get enough.    
 The Anniversary 
You raise the ax,  the block of wood screams in half,  while I lift the sack of flour  and carry it into the house.  I'm not afraid of the blade  you've just pointed at my head.  If I were dead, you could take the boy,  hunt, kiss gnats, instead of my moist lips.  Take it easy, squabs are roasting,  corn, still in husks, crackles,  as the boy dances around the table:  old guest at a wedding party for two sad-faced clowns,  who together, never won a round of anything but hard times.  Come in, sheets are clean,  fall down on me for one more year  and we can blast another hole in ourselves without a sound. 

The Country Midwife:  A Day 


The fine delight that fathers thought; the strong 
Spur, live and lancing like the blowpipe flame, 
Breathes once and, quenchèd faster than it came, 
Leaves yet the mind a mother of immortal song. 
Nine months she then, nay years, nine years she long 
Within her wears, bears, cares and combs the same: 
The widow of an insight lost she lives, with aim 
Now known and hand at work now never wrong. 
  Sweet fire the sire of muse, my soul needs this; 
I want the one rapture of an inspiration. 
O then if in my lagging lines you miss 
the roll, the rise, the carol, the creation, 
My winter world, that scarcely breathes that bliss 
Now, yields you, with some sighs, our explanation. 


No worst, there is none. Pitched past pitch of grief, 
More pangs will, schooled at forepangs, wilder wring. 
Comforter, where, where is your comforting? 
Mary, mother of us, where is your relief? 
My cries heave, herds-long; huddle in a main, a chief 
Woe, world-sorrow; on an age-old anvil wince and sing -- 
Then lull, then leave off. Fury had shrieked "No ling- 
ering! Let me be fell: force I must be brief". 
   O the mind, mind has mountains; cliffs of fall 
Frightful, sheer, no-man-fathomed. Hold them cheap 
May who ne'er hung there. Nor does long our small 
Durance deal with that steep or deep. Here! creep, 
Wretch, under a comfort serves in a whirlwind: all 
Life death does end and each day dies with sleep. 


It was a hard thing to undo this knot. 
The rainbow shines but only in the thought 
Of him that looks. Yet not in that alone, 
For who makes rainbows by invention? 
And many standing round a waterfall 
See one bow each, yet not the same to all, 
But each a hand's breadth further than the next. 
The sun on falling waters writes the text 
Which yet is in the eye or in the thought. 
It was a hard thing to undo this knot. 




