If in a shimmering room the babies came. 
Drawn close by dreams of fledgling wing. 
It was because night nursed them in its fold. 

Night nursed not him in whose dark mind 

The clambering wings of birds of black revolved^ 

Making harsh torment of the solitude. 

The walker in the moonlight walked alone> 

And in his heart his disbelief lay cold. 

His broad-brimmed hat came close upon his eyes. 

FROM THE MISERY OF DON JOOST 

I have finished my combat with the sun; 
And my body, the old animal^ 
Knows nothing more. 

The powerful seasons bred and killed, 
And were themselves the genii 
Of their own ends. 

Oh, but the very self of the storm 
Of sun and slaves, breeding and death, 
The old animal — 

The senses and feeling, the very sound 
And sight, and all there was of the storm — 
Knows nothing more. 


Wallace Stevens 



THE DOCTOR OF GENEVA 



The doctor of Geneva stamped the sand 
That lay impounding the Pacific swell. 
Patted his stove-pipe hat and tugged his shawl. 

Lacustrine man had never been assailed 
By such long-rolling opulent cataracts, 
Unless Racine or Bossuet held the like. 

He did not quail. A man so used to plumb 
The multifarious heavens felt no awe 
Before these visible, voluble delugings. 

Which yet found means to set his simmering mind 
Spinning and hissing with oracular 
Notations of the wild, the ruinous waste, 

Until the steeples of his city clanked and sprang 

In an unburgherly apocalypse. 

The doctor used his handkerchief and sighed. 

GUBBINAL 

That strange flower, the sun. 
Is just what you say. 
Have it your way. 

The world is ugly. 
And the people are sad. 

That tuft of jungle feathers, 
That animal eye, 
Is just what you say. 

That savage of fire, 
That seed — 
Have it your way. 

The world is ugly, 
And the people are sad. 



THE SNOW MAN 

One must have a mind of winter 
To regard the frost and the boughs 
Of the pine-trees crusted with snow; 

And have been cold a long time 

To behold the junipers shagged with ice, 

The spruces rough in the distant glitter 

Of the January sun; and not to think 
Of any misery in the sound of the wind, 
In the sound of a few leaves, 

Which is the sound of the land 

Full of the same wind 

That is blowing in the same bare place 


Wallace Stevens 



For the listener, who listens in the snow, 

And, nothing himself, beholds 

Nothing that is not there and the nothing that is. 



TEA AT THE PALAZ OF HOOK 

Not less because in purple I descended 
Th» western day through what you called 
The loneliest air, not less was I myself. 

What was the ointment sprinkled on my beard? 
What were the hymns that buzzed beside my ears? 
What was the sea whose tide swept through me there? 

Out of my mind the golden ointment rained, 
And my ears made the blowing hymns they heard. 
I was myself the compass of that sea: 

I was the world in which I walked, and what I saw 

Or heard or felt came not but from myself; 

And there I found myself more truly and more strange. 



THE CUBAN DOCTOR 

I went to Egypt to escape 

The Indian, but the Indian struck 

Out of his cloud and from his sky. 

This was no worm bred in the moon, 
Wriggling far down the phantom air, 
And on a comfortable sofa dreamed. 

The Indian struck and disappeared. 
I knew my enemy was near — I, 
Drowsing in summer's sleepiest horn. 



ANOTHER WEEPING WOMAN 

Pour the unhappiness out 
From your too bitter heart, 
Which grieving will not sweeten. 

Poison grows in this dark. 
It is in the water of tears 
Its black blooms rise. 

The magnificent cause of being — 
The imagination, the one reality 
In this imagined world — 

Leaves you 

With him for whom no phantasy moves. 

And you are pierced by a death. 




Wallace Stevens 



OF THE MANNER OF ADDRESSING CLOUDS 

Gloomy grammarians in golden gowns> 

Meekly you keep the mortal rendezvous, 

Eliciting the still sustaining pomps 

Of speech which are like music so profound 

They seem an exaltation without sound. 

Funest philosophers and ponderers, 

Their evocations are the speech of clouds. 

So speech of your processionals returns 

In the casual evocations of your tread 

Across the stale, mysterious seasons. These 

Are the music of meet resignation; these 

The responsive, still sustaining pomps for you 

To magnify, if in that drifting waste 

You are to be accompanied by more 

Than mute bare splendors of the sun and moon. 



OF HEAVEN CONSIDERED AS A TOMB 

What word have you, interpreters, of men 
Who in the tomb of heaven walk by night, 
The darkened ghosts of our old comedy? 
Do they believe they range the gusty cold. 
With lanterns borne aloft to light the way. 
Freemen of death, about and still about 
To find whatever it is they seek? Or does 

That burial, pillared up each day as porte 
And spiritous passage into nothingness, 
Foretell each night the one abysmal night, 
When the host shall no more wander, nor the light 
Of the steadfast lanterns creep across the dark? 
Make hue among the dark comedians. 
Halloo them in the topmost distances 
For answer from their icy Elys6e. 

THE LOAD OF SUGAR-CANE 

The going of the glade-boat 
Is like water flowing; 

Like water flowing 
Through the green saw-grass, 
Under the rainbows; 

Under the rainbows 
That are like birds, 
TuQiing, bedizened. 

While the wind still whistles 
As kildeer do. 

When they rise 
At the red turban 
Of the boatman. 


Wallace Stevens 

HIBISCUS ON THE SLEEPING SHORES 

I say now, Fernando, that on that day 
The mind roamed as a moth roams, 
Among the blooms beyond the open sand; 

And that whatever noise the motion of the waves 
Made on the sea-weeds and the covered stones 
Disturbed not even the most idle ear. 

Then it was that that monstered moth 
Which had lain folded against the blue 
And the colored purple of the lazy sea, 

And which had drowsed along the bony shores, 
Shut to the blather that the water made. 
Rose up besprent and sought the flaming red 

Dabbled with yellow pollen — red as red 

As the flag above the old caf6 — 

And roamed there all the stupid afternoon. 

Wallace Stevens 



FROM CITY LANES 

The dawn comes to me sweetly^ as a soft new child 
Leans with its soul to drain a bit of milk. 
And I am new. 

gray old city^ 

Lift your head a moment from the pots and streets — 
fVash over me your meaning as a flask of fire 
Tipped and spilled over at the altar* s base. 

There are new augurings that go in blue-gray smoke 
Up from your shops y 

New lips that rain a torrent in me as of words. 
Be still a moment y cityy while the dawn tells tales. 

CITY WED 

1 lie by the bricks at night — 

Do you think I am lying by you, 

And this is your breast I lean against? 

No. Bricks are my lord — 

With them I shall procreate, 

Until I wake some morning with my litter of stone. 

Not that I want to lie with bricks, 

O beloved of the white limbs and strong neck! 

But how can I help it when they come tumbling — 

These bricks that come fumbling 

At my breast? 

[lO] 



 



Loureine Aber 



IF 



If it were not for this dream upon me, 

I should make my coin; 

I should grind my way to fortune with the little wheels, 

I should count the flying heels my slaves to bind, 

I should count the eardrums and the fingers mine. . . . 

But I keep thinking I can touch the sky 

With my lips. 

ELEVATOR MAN 

You in your little cage and I in mine. 

Elevator man. 

We will pierce the wide world's heaven 

Far as we can: 

You to go up and down, beating up and down; 

I to brush my wings ofF 

On the walls of Merchant Town. 

BEREFT 

my country, 

1 am crying to you piteously as a hungry bird, 
I am crying to you for your beautiful ports 
And harbors. 

For the slow beauty of your Statue and its silent hope. 
O my country, I would slink into the crevices of your 

egoism. 
And squat on the doormat of your excellences. 

[II] 



 



POETRY: A Magazine of Ferse 

But what shall I do when mad spring comes, 
And blossoms come, 
And wild sap comes — 
But my lover comes not? 

O my country, I might be a thin thread in your flag, 
Or the little wind blowing your ships to sea; 
But what shall I do when the spring comes in, 
And flowers shoot up in me? 



OLD MAN 

Dawn sprang wildly to her lips, 

And the little hard breasts burst as a waterfall over the 

rocks. 
I, the dark pine at the precipice edge. 
Lunged and was still; 
Then swiftly, as wild birds go to the kill. 
Toppled, and ran with her youth to the sea. 

They said I was wanton and cruel 

To have taken her youth at the height. 

To have matched the great might 

Of my years 

With her slender beauty and tremulous fears. 

I tell you, I lunged and was still; 

Then swiftly, as wild birds go to the kill, 


Loureine Aber 



Toppled, and ran with her youth to the sea. 
Pity me! 

GIRL 

Dreamily, girl — 

Duskily, night, 

Cover your dead. 

Make a plot by the old stream's head. 

Plant him and pray 

Till worlds make way 

And the blooms come. 

Duskily, night — 
Dreamily, girl. 

DEATH 



I am waiting for the white winds to come. 

White with the long-whispering dust, 

Withered under hoofs and feet. 

White with the mountains that blow their sleep 

Into the sea. 

I am waiting for the white winds to come. 

Lifting their hands as beautiful women clad for the moon; 

And soon, ah soon, 

Lifting my heart to be ashes and wind. 

Loureine Aber 


POETRY: A Magazine oj Ferse 
POEMS 

JOY 

Joy, Joy, run over me 

Like water over a shining stone; 

And I beneath your sweet shall be 

No longer hungry and alone. 

The light at my heart's gate is lit — 

My love, my love is tending it! 

CEREMONY 

The unpeopled conventional rose garden 

Is where I shall take my heart 

With this new pain. 

Clipped hedge and winter-covered beds 

Shall ease its hurt. 

When it has grown quiet, 

I shall mount the steps, slowly, 

And put three sorrows in the terra-cotta urn 

On that low gate-pillar. 

And leave them there, to sleep, 

Beneath the brooding stillness of a twisted pine. 

FIRST COMER 

Gold bee, 

You cling too still and drowsily 


Maurine Smith 

In the frosty noon. 

Think you 

The dandelion is a sun 

To warm your body through? 

WIND 

Gulls take veering way 

Through the fresh day; 

Crisp brown oak-leaves whirl and rise. 

Though my heart flies, 

I must go 

Carefully and slow. 

Eager is the wind> shy 

As any butterfly — 

ril not blur life with my frosty breath, 

Nor think again of death ! 

SWALLOWS BRUSH A POOL 

Let there be end of talk of good and evil, 
Thirst, hunger and the rest . . . Beauty has given 
The white gift of a cherry petal 
To brood upon. 

Maurine Smith 



[IS] 




 
THREE SMALL POEMS 



TO GET WISDOM 

I will spread out my mind 
As the wind spreads the skies; 
I will make my heart Argus, 
Full of love's eyes: 
So shall I grow 
Abysmally wise. 

MEEKNESS AND PRIDE 

Meekness and Pride 
Are fruits of one tree; 
Eat of them both 
For mastery: 
Take one of Pride — 
Of the other, three. 

COURAGE 

4 

Courage is armor 

A blind man wears, 

The calloused scar 

Of outlived despairs : 

Courage is Fear 

That has said its prayers. 

[i6] 



 



Karle fFihon Baker 

NOT IN THE WHIRLWIND 

Do I speak soft and little — 

Do I offer you a drop of honey in a bent brown leaf? 

Yet I too have been rent by the whirlwind: 

I have lain trembling under its bellowings; 

I have endured its fangs; 

I have heard it hiss and groan, "Bitterness, bitterness!" 

But all I have left, 

After its searchings and its rendings. 

May be told in a soft voice 

And is sweet — 

Sweet, 

Like a drop of thick honey in a bent brown leaf. 

Karle Wilson Baker 



KEEP MY HAND 

Keep my hand, because I am afraid 

To be alone — 
I am afraid of all the dreams I made. 

If you were shown 
Dream after little dream that I made gay 
To keep my spirit strong upon the way, 
You would hold my hand closer than you do 

Within your own! 

Louise Driscoll 


UNDER THE CLIFF 

SHADOW CANYON 

The earth has carved a hollow cup. 

In which, most delicately set. 
Tall redwood boughs are lifted up, 

To form a sky-enlacing net. 

There, on the ground made green with fern. 
The sunshine lies in pools of light; 

And iris holds a fragile urn, 
With morning's gems of dew bedight. 

There is no sound but water going. 
And sunlight thrilling through the air. 

There is no breath but breezes blowing. 
And wild quail rustling to their lair. 

Here is a deep and drowsing haven, 
That woven sun-rays pierce and cross; 

And on the peaceful trees are graven 
The little footprints of the moss. 

Sweet dreaming canyon, shadow-bound 
Yet sunshine-stippled all the day, 

The calm skies circle you around. 
But you lie deeper hushed than they! 

[i8] 



 



Miriam Allen deFord 



THEMES 



"I remember" and "I wish*'— 

Of such stuff are poems fashioned; 
Poems lyric with regret, 

Vibrant poems> dream-impassioned. 

In your honor and your praise 

I would strike a richer chord. 
Sing: "I have you and am yours, 

O adorer and adored!" 

WILL IT BE LIKE THIS? 

Will it be like this?— 

Climbing the hill at midnight. 

While the rain seeps from the plumaged pepper-trees, 

And the damp air is rank with eucalyptus; 

And our little house black and untenanted. 

Soundless, where your hurrying footsteps 

Used to run to the door to greet me; 

Black, and cold, and I alone there? 

Will that be the way of it, 

On that silent day when I shall begin waiting 

For Death to release me to you? 

Miriam Allen deFord 



SIC PASSIM 

The Angel. Now here's the road to Allencourt, 
And here's the road to Tyre. 
And he who goes to Allencourt 
Is purged of all desire. 

The Youth. But what of him who goes to Tyre, 

Among the cedar trees? 
The Angel. Why, he who goes to Tyre has none 

But just himself to please. 

While he who goes to Allencourt 
Across the Hills of Pain 
Must love his fellow very well. 
And count no thing as gain 

That wounds another. He must keep 
His eyes upon the crest 
Of that high'hill, where he at last 
Through virtue shall find rest. 

The Youth, But what of him who goes to Tyre, 

Along the road of ease? 
The Angel. Why, he who goes to Tyre has none 

But just himself to please; 

While he who goes to Allencourt, 
And does not lose his way 
Among the thorns and brambles, comes 
To rich reward some day. 


Joseph Andrew Galahad 

The Old Man, Ah, why are thorns and brambles set 

To make the road a care? 
The AngeL Why, man himself, most carelessly, 

Has placed the brambles there. 

The Youth. But what of him who goes to Tyre 

Beside the sunny seas? 
The AngeL Why, he who goes to Tyre has none 

But just himself to please. 

The Old Man. And what's the toll to Allencourt? 
The Youth. And what's the toll to Tyre? 
The AngeL Why, he who goes to Allencourt 
Is purged of all desire. 

The toll is love — a brother's love — 
For man in full sincerity. 
And all the peace that God has willed 
Is the reward — eternally. 

But toll upon the other road 
Is crucible of burn and freeze: 
For he who goes to Tyre has none 
But just himself to please. 

While he who goes to Allencourt 

Is purged of all desire . . . 
The Old Man. Lord, lead me on to Allencourt! 
The Youth. For me, I go to Tyre. 

RECALLED 

You see it not . . . ? This Rose of Rhone 

Has something of the flow 

Of light — like a liquid lacquer on the wall. 

And old Madrid — I swear, it shone 

More with your light, your glow. 

Than that of the sun. Why do your eyelids fall? 

You hear it not . . . ? The Prado was 

A sweeping meadow then: 

The swing of the tunes of time was in your tone. 

No dream comes to you now because 

You hear my voice again — 

No dream of a youth you passed at dusk alone? 

Three hundred years . . • ! you mark them not? 

And yet — you loved mc then, 

Who now in the light of muUioned windows stand. 

And it is you who have forgot 

That once, O sought of men! — 

When I was the king of Spain I kissed your hand. 

Joseph Andrew Galahad 




SEA QUATRAINS 

I 
Too fast the silly white-^aps run 

Their helter-skelter races; 
They stumble when the goal is won 

And fall upon their faces. 
II 
A purple light is shaken over 

The greener ocean shadows, 
Like clover on the cooler depths 

Of grass in upland meadows. 
Ill 
The sea hangs kelp upon the sand 

Like garlands on a grave. 
Mourning the dead and silent land 

With every living wave. 

IV 

The breakers thunder in the night 
With which the sea is drenched. 

Only one plunging line is white; 
Even the stars are quenched. 

V 

The fairest ship ever a wreck 

Had not so white a sail 
As this fair wave cast up to break. 

Driven before the gale. 

Grant //. Code 
FRAGILITIES 



SONG 



These are the words of the wind: 

Over your white body shall pass 

Whorls of water, whorls of light. 

Of the lustre of blown glass. 
These are the words of the wind. 

You are beloved of the silence 

And the grey still rain. 
Once the sun loved you utterly, 

And shall love you again. 

These are the words of the wind: 

Over your white body shall pass 

Whorls of water, whorls of light, 

Of the lustre of blown glass. 
These are the words of the wind. 

LAKE 

You are a broad white lake, 

Silent. 

On your surface people launch their brown sun-warmed 

souls. 
Reflected in you, they see themselves 
Tall, profound, mystical. 


COMMENT 

POETRY AND THE ALLIED ARTS 

P>OETRY would like to celebrate its ninth birthday 
-1^ by inaugurating a closer affiliation with the allied 
arts of music and the drama — perhaps also the dance. 
If the movies, and the scarcely less photographic commer- 
cial plays, are banishing poetry from one end of the stage, 
it must needs go around to the other door, and re-enter 
hand in hand with the opera and lyric song, with the 
ballet, and perhaps, paradoxically, symbolic pantomine. 
Times are changing, and the arts with them — the poet, 
the composer, the dancer should prove their pliancy, 
their mobility. They should not — indeed, they cannot — 
stay apart; they must get together and co-operate, and 
accept each other's influence. 

At present our poets and composers move in different 
orbits, have scarcely a bowing acquaintance with each 
other either personally or professionally. Poetry would 
be grateful for suggestions as to the best available method 
of establishing closer relations. 

Not long ago Musical America published an article 
by Charles Albert Case, a well-known tenor, entitled 
The ^uest of the American Songy and sub-titled A Chal- 
lenge to Poets rather than Composers. Mr. Case thinks 
that the American public wants American songs, and 
that the singers are eager for this change from the usual 
polyglot programs, but that it is impossible to make up 

a sufficiently interesting and varied recital without 

foreign aid. And for this condition he thinks our poets 

are more to blame than our musicians. He says: 

The fact that there are few American tongs which are truly great is a 
challenge to American poets rather than to American composers. The 
question "what to sing" is the most vital and the most persistently 
intrusive one that a busy song recitalist has to face. Naturally American 
singers want very much to sing American songs, and most of us do sing 
them, but in building our recital programs we invariably fincl ourselves 
limited in the number of such songs we can use; for we must avoid singing 
a succession x>f songs in the same humor, and when one is face to face 
with the assembled material one finds that the contrasting elements 
which make for essential variety in the "group unit" are astonishingly 
lacking. 

Mr. Case then contrasts our meagreness with German 
and French richness, and continues: 

Being a loyal American, I admit it reluctantly, but there is far less 
variety in American songs, even when one plans to choose a group from 
several different composers, than one can find in any single one of the 
greater German song-writers. . . . 

We have some splendid American songs and some of them are truly 
noble, but most of them are not good enough. Many of the most 
successful of them are settings by other than American poets. Some of 
the best of them are not even in English! 

Mr. Case then reminds us that a good song must unite 
two arts — a fundamental truth which both singers and 
auditors too often forget. He inquires, "What con- 
stitutes a good song?" and answers his query thus: 

j1 good poem adequately set to music. There is the whole matter in a 
nutshell. 

Hie many bad American songs are bad either because the text was 
trivial to b^n with, or else was carelessly read and consequently 
inadequately interpreted in music. In some cases the text was even 


Poetry and the Allied Arts 

"adapted" — distorted, pinched and pulled into the approximate shape 
of a ready-made melody. Ready-made melodies are like ready-made 
clothes. They fit nobody because they were made to fit everybody. 

Schubert read Mueller, Goethe, Heine, Rueckert, Uhland, Shake- 
q)eare. Schumann read Rueckert, Geibel, Uhland, EichendorfiF, 
Moerike. Chansson read DeLisle and Gautier. These men read the 
best poetry of thdr time, and they read it with true understanding and 
genuine respect. What greatness there was in them lay largely in their 
power to discriminate, to select fine poetry from the mediocre, and then 
to bend to the task of making worthy musical settings. Too often our 
young Americans write as though they thought the lyrics of which they 
try to make songs were not good enough for them. . • . 

I have firequendy been asked by young aspiring composers to help 
them find words to set to music. They say: " You know— something you 
consider singable. I haven't time to read." This is rank impudence. 
I never offer such people much sympathy. I do not think they should 
be encouraged. It seems to me that one must read much poetry to 
onderstand a little. Reading, and reading with unusual intelligence, is 
part of a song-writer's job. 

Thus far Mr. Case's indictment accuses the composers, 

but he concludes with a fling at the poets: 

I have real sympathy for the trained, educated, honest-intentioned 
American composer who reads native poets and finds so little to inspire 
him to exercise his genius. Surely his material is limited. Eventually 
we shall have truly noble American songs. But first there must be 
noUe American poetry. From the mass of it the song-writer must 
choose with a fine exercise of discrimination. We have many Americans 
who have the taste to choose and the ability adequately to set beautiful 
poetry to music. But American song-writing is at the same stage of 
development as American poetry. Let us hope that some of the lyrically 
gifted will start soon to write about something besides the sunset and 
the skyline from the Jersey shore, or the sensation of ascending Wool- 
worth tower in a modem elevator! 

Now, with all due deference to Mr. Case and his 
''trained, educated, honest-intentioned American com- 

poser," we doubt whether either one of them has sym- 
pathetically investigated the extraordinary range and 
variety of modern American poetry. We doubt whether 
either one of them, having discovered a poet suggestive 
for his purpose, has ever tried to get acquainted with 
him, even if he was a neighbor, and discuss this highly 
interesting esthetic problem on which the future of 
American song depends. 

There is among American artists — ^poets, musicians, 
and all the others — a curious professionsd aloofness which 
fights against co-operation. The architect makes his 
design, the sculptor models his isolated figure, the painter 
paints his easel picture, all separate and alone — they do 
not get together, as in the Phidian or the Gothic age, or 
the Renaissance, to pool their energies and make a 
grand, complete and monumental building. In the 
same infertile way the poet writes his poem apart in his 
traditional garret; and the musician, seeking a song 
poem, or a ballet motive, or an opera libretto, reads in 
his library uncharted seas of poetry, history and romance 
instead of going where modern poetry is created and 
swinging into its current, so that the two arts may move 
along together and mutually inspire each other. 

Among themselves poets — and doubtless musicians, 
painters, and the rest — are free-and-easy enough in 
intercourse and criticism. But this professional aloof- 
ness, this shyness, comes in the way of attempts at co- 
operation. A distinguished Chicago composer says he 


Poetry and the Allied Arts 

is "very familiar" with the work of certain equally dis- 
tinguished Illinois poetS) though, to his regret, he has 
never succeeded in harnessing up their poetry to his 
music; but we doubt if he has ever attempted to work 
together with any modern poet, in the frank give-and-take 
of such a partnership, toward the production of a wholly 
modern and American work of art. When I protest 
against his going back to the nineties for a pseudo- 
romantic motive for a ballet, when I suggest Stevens or 
Kreymborg, H. D. or Edna Millay, he answers by what 
might be called a flank attack: 

I am yeiy grateful to you for the copies of Poetry which you sent 
to me containing the Stevens and Kreymborg pieces. I like particularly 
the Three Traoe/ers, although I doubt whether I could improve it any 
with music. 

It seems to me that the thing we must all remember in talking about 
an opera libretto is the fact that we must depend for our effect on the 
poetry or the drama of the action rather than on the poetry or drama of 
the words. Therefore, the ideal opera librettist would be the poet gone 
dumb who, by his simple gesture, could make us jump through any 
hoop he pleases. 

But even if this composer and others are turning 
toward pantomime and ballet rather than opera, pre- 
ferring the orchestra to the human voice, even so they 
cannot eliminate the poet; for though no word be said, 
no song sung, the imaginative invention of some poet, 
dead or living, must furnish the motive,, the story, the 
plot. And no doubt the ballet of the future will include 
the poem either as an introductory recitative or a series 
of lyric, perhaps choral, interludes; as in Rimsky-Kor- 

sakov's ballet-opera, The Golden Cockerel. Thus it is for 
the composer to choose whether he will be true to his own 
age and race by linking up with modern poets and de- 
riving his stimulus from imaginations now actively 
functioning; or go back to dead poets for his motive, and 
thereby run the risk of endangering the vitality of his 
own art, of not connecting it up with either the present 
or the past. 

But however important ballet and pantomime may 
prove as motives for modern music, it is safe to predict 
that the human voice will not lose its prestige. And it 
must be safe to predict that the sooner our composers 
look to their poet-neighbors for the texts of opera, oratorio, 
cantata, song-cycle, ballad, madrigal, song, instead of 
searching all ages, myths and languages of the past, the 
sooner will our musical art become as up-to-date and as 
racially expressive as the musical art of Russia. 

Something has been done, no doubt. The present 
writer would be ungrateful not to recall Mr. Chadwick's 
fine choral and orchestral setting of the lyrics in The 
Columbian Ode. Another effective instance is John 
Carpenter's beautiful setting of Tagore's lyrics from an 
early number of Poetry. And we are permitted to 
announce an oratorio, which is to be the joint creation 
of Louise Ayres. Garnett and Henry Hadley, the text of 
which will appear, under the title Resurganty in Poetry 
for December. But such instances are isolated cases; 
they do not yet represent a general tendency. 


Poetry and the Allied Arts 

If Poetry can do anything toward such a tendency 
by making poets and composers more aware of each 
other, bringing them more in contact personal and 
spiritual, we should be most happy to offer to the utmost 
any service in our powen And we shall be very glad 
of discussion and su^estions. H. M. 

INFLUENCE OF THE ART-THEATRE ON POETIC DRAMA 

If the new movement in the theatre had accomplished 
nothing else, it would nevertheless be justified by the 
release it has brought to poetic drama and to the poetic 
mood in drama. The new movement, long since estab- 
lished in continental Europe, still struggles precariously 
in the virgin soil of America. It exists, however; and 
having existed thus far, it probably will continue to exist 
until in time it flourishes. 

Meanwhile, by the creation of a modern technique, 
it offers poetic drama in English the first justifiable hope 
of escape from the senile lethargy into which three cen- 
turies of imitation had plunged it. Strictly speaking, 
there had been no poetic drama since the Puritans stopped 
the rich stream of Elizabethan eloquence by closing the 
theatres in 1642. Occasionally a dramatist, deriving his 
method from a compromise between the continentals, 
the Greeks and Shakespeare, had made a play in verse; 
or, more stagnantly, had built a romantic hodge-podge, 
verbose and rhetorical, around the pseudo-realistic 

formula of the days of gas-lamp illumination. But there 
had been no impetus, no technical incentive, towards a 
renascence of poetic drama until the new movement 
cleansed the theatre by challenging theatric values. 

"To save the theatre," said Eleanora Duse, "the 
theatre must first be destroyed." And the younger men, 
the revolutionists, set themselves to destroy it in theory, 
and to recreate it in practice and theory both, by the 
simple but incisive idea of re-iheatralization. No better 
proof could be offered of the sterility of poetic drama than 
the fact that these men were all, without exception, men 
of the theatre — directors, scenic artists, actors — none of 
them playwrights. In other words, the new movement 
differed from any earlier developments of the kind, so 
far as I know, in being almost wholly independent of the 
drama. The emphasis was shifted decisively from the 
drama to the theatre as the dominant art form. 

Now, that habit of mind which insists that the theatre 
shall be the handmaid of the arts, and particularly of the 
art of writing, is apt to view such a transfer of emphasis 
with alarm. For the theatre to assert its own inherent 
vitality is permissible so long as it does not intrude this 
vitality into the sacred traditions of the drama. But 
the new movement involves an esthetic too fundamental 
not to re-open the entire problem of dramatic construc- 
tion. Concerned chiefly with the production of the 
play in the theatre, it uncovers an esthetic resource that 
touches the very definition of poetic drama. 


Influence of the Art-theatre on Poetic Drama 

The reform in stagecraft is a protest against the fal- 
lacy of a realistic technique, against that ineptitude of 
the mise en scene which has made "theatrical" a syn- 
onym for the imitation of beauty by tinsel and exagger- 
ation. It is toward a simplified and therefore an 
allusive and poetic decoration, toward an emotional 
and therefore a poetic use of light, toward a rhythmic and 
therefore a poetic movement. In synthesizing these vis- 
ual elements into an organic whole, the new stagecraft has 
released in them a dramatic value entirely apart from 
representation. Just as poetry is the rhythmic expres- 
sion of a theme to be developed by words, so these visual 
elements in the theatre serve both the purpose of repre- 
sentation and of rhythmic beauty. Thus, the background 
may be both a statement of locality, and a design holding 
the production in key. Movement may be utilized not 
only for its obvious and objective purpose, but also for 
the intrinsic beauty of motion. Light, treated emotion- 
ally, is capable of following, emphasis^ing, or even leading 
the mood of the action. 

I have attempted briefly to indicate the trend of the 
new stagecraft because in this discovery of an independent 
esthetic resource in the visual elements of the theatre 
originates the essential difference between the new tech- 
nique and the old, as it affects the dramatist. The central 
rhythm of the play, instead of being developed through 
words only, is developed through all the media of pro- 
duction — through light, stage decoration and movement 

as well as through the spoken word. These visual elements 
become a part of the inner structure of the play; and 
because of their poetic quality they bind the theatre 
inseparably to poetry, to poetic drama, making the 
theatre a place well fitted for the renascence of poetic 
drama. 

But with these additional factors of expression, it is no 
longer necessary for the dramatist to trust so exclusively, 
and cling so tenaciously, to words. In the Elizabethan 
drama even the locality of the scene was often stated in 
words: every mood, every emotion was projected verbally. 
It was a drama of eloquence; and as such it suited, as no 
other form could, the torrential flood of Elizabethan 
poetry. But modem poetry, irrespective of the drama, is 
more restrained; it tends to leave much unsaid, to project 
the meaning by ellipsis and overtones. Unless I am mis- 
taken, though I know little of the technique of poetry, 
this brevity is sometimes carried to extreme lengths, in 
which the imagination of the reader supplies much more 
at the poet's instigation than the poet himself expresses. 
It is a subtle technique; and it is pre-eminently the 
technique of the dramatist. 

With this distinction: that, instead of restraining verbal 
expression to stimulate the imagination of the reader, the 
dramatist uses words cautiously in adjustment to the 
other media of his expression. To take an obvious, and 
well understood, example: a gesture is sometimes equal 
in effectiveness to many words. In the theiatre^ where 


Influence of the ArMheatre on Poetic Drama 

economy of expression is imperative, gesture and words 
will often complement each other without duplication. 
And what is true of gesture becomes true in the art- 
theatre of all phases in movement, of stage decoration, of 
light; and on occasign of music. 

The effect of this upon the poetry of the poetic drama, 
and especially upon verse structure, is significant and far- 
reaching. It necessitates the development of a verse form 
that will admit of distortions, interruptions and irreg- 
ularities. These are more apparent than real. As soon 
as the poetic drama is conceived as a fusion of many arts 
into an organic whole, the rhythm of the play becomes an 
inclusive rhythm to the progression of which all the media 
are contributory and in a sense subordinate. The irreg- 
ularities in such a drama would be due to the separation 
of the verse from its theatric context. When the play 
came into being in the theatre these irregularities would 
disappear, merging into the larger current of rhythmic 
beauty. To the dramatist this may seem the weakness 
or the strength of the new poetic drama — that it comes to 
fulfilment only in the theatre, as a symphony lives only in 
the orchestra. 

Blank verse, which alone of the standard forms has 
been accepted as a proper medium for the poetic drama in 
English, depends for acceptance upon an insidious flexi- 
bility. This flexibility serves the purpose of the theatre 
so long as the characters keep talking. But talk they 
must; and the terrified volubility of the poetic drama is, 

I think, one of the reasons why it has been in general a 
form displeasing to modern audiences. This is no fault of 
blank verse, which has been deflected from its original and 
legitimate intention to serve as best it might an art that 
lacks its own form. It has thus created a compromise 
between the printed page and the theatre which has made 
the poetic drama neither fish nor flesh, neither wholly 
satisfactory for reading nor wholly satisfactory for acting. 
Moreover, the need for well-rounded periods has reacted 
upon the dramatist by giving him a false sense of 
untroubled leisure. The time element, which scarcely 
exists in the printed page, is in the theatre of the utmost 
importance. The reader may take his own pace: the 
auditor must listen; he must accept the pace of the actor. 
The verse is spoken apparently with a retarded movement, 
and must therefore be quantitatively less, and more com- 
pact for the purpose. Such a compactness is hostile, one 
would say, judging by examples, to the mood of blank 
verse. One need only refer, among many instances, to the 
plays of Stephen Phillips or Zoe Akins, each of whom has 
a keen dramatic instinct; or to that parody of Elizabethan 
grandeur, that reductio ad absurdum of rhetoric in a theme 
not without power, Caius Gracchus^ to note the clogging 
result of the intrusion of the stricter verse forms into the 
theatre. It may almost be stated as a generality that, 
other things being equal, the more smoothly a play reads 
the worse it will act. 


Influence of the Art-theatre on Poetic Drama 

A new verse form that wiU be native to the theatre, that 
will be an inseparable component of the flow of the com- 
plex rhythm of the play, cannot be created out of hand. 
It too, like the modification of painting for stage decora- 
tion, of illumination for emotional lighting, must develop 
through knowledge of the exigencies of the medium. To 
understand the poetic theatre is to understand the use of 
poetry in that theatre. In America the dramatist has 
grasped neither the technique nor the possibilities in 
expression that it offers him. Toy plays, G)lumbine 
plays, gay and adolescent trifles, thin tragedies — all 
superficial experiments in the externals of the new stage- 
craft — follow one another in an almost (but fortunately 
not quite) unbroken succession. 

In a recent article the most brilliant director that the 
new movement has produced this side the Atlantic, 
Maurice Browne, summarizes thus the situation in respect 
of finding a drama for the art-theatre: 

Afight which has hardly begun: the fight for M^pAzy. That is where 
the Chicago Little Theatre failed, and where all the artist-groups in 
America have failed, except perhaps the Provincetown Players. 

But it may be true that out of a clearer understanding 
will come the dramatist who will evolve the form which 
his medium demands. And after him — the deluge. 

Cloyd Head 


REVIEWS 

MUSEUM SHIPS 

Ships in HarboTy by David Morton. G. P. Putnam's Sons. 

What is there in David Morton's verse that seems to 
save it, that intervenes in moments of irritation with its 
punctual urbanity? There is not an original line in it. 
Not one cry, one intense expression comes from it; one 
vision, that the poet has kept from his privileged dreaming, 
which can draw the mind an inch out of even the shallowest 
rut. 

Is it- its cleanly manufacture, its unstraying measures 
and kempt familiar figurines? To me its charm has been 
a charm too soon worn out — the charm that sometimes 
attracts us to a diffident guest when we are overborne by 
the intrusions and ineptitudes of the vivacious, when the 
quiet and subdued deceptively appear to be powerful and 
profound. 

It is fatal, however, to turn closely to the poems them- 
selves for verification. They are demure enough, but thin 
and fragile; and made with earnest and helpless plagiarism. 
Never the robust piracies of a Shakespeare or Sterne, but 
a pallid imitativeness that paints the past more ruinous 
with perfunctory restorations, and blows about it feeble 
ghosts — ^pale, mute, and not recognizable as ghosts should 
be, of any of the shapes of destiny. 

The book is called Ships in Harhor — there is such a poem 
in the book, and other occasional verses on ships. But 


Museum Ships 

the reader who expects salt and storniy or anything 
authenticaUy of the sea, should look elsewhere — in the 
dubious prose of Joseph Conrad, for instance. There are 
some conventionally nautical words and phrases, and the 
tidy thoughtfulness about mystical things that gives to 
diffident, cornered people their misleading impressiveness. 
It makes David Morton talk twice, on successive pages, of 
''weightless cargoes" — and one might add lifeless crews, 
and meaningless uses, and tinsel. The sea is brought in 
because it is on the same wall with Greece and Rome, 
spring and patriotism; and not being so bent with overuse, 
is more convenient to hang poems upon. Sonnets — for 
David Morton writes mostly in sonnets. 

We agree that grammar \s spoken language, stagnant; 
out of which nevertheless speech drips and sometimes 
splashes. We agree that rhetoric is literature, stagnant; 
that as there can be limitless variations of the correct 
sentences, phrases, clauses and what-nots of grammar, so 
there can be a limitless variation of forms of rhetoric. 
These verses are rhetoric, often skilful and surprising, 
often mildly intricate; but never poetry. 

There should be a word bearing the same relation to 
subject matter which grammar and rhetoric bear to 
language. Pageant, perhaps; but pageant is free, ringing, 
and dramatic. Pageant is play, and this other thing 
pretends solemnly to poetrjr; but uses pageant properties. 
It rounds up all the popular places and heroes, the story- 
book locales and personae,and treats them with apologetic 


POETRY: A Magazine of Ferse 

sophistication, and with a snuffling sentimentality very 
wide of the crude romantics of the pageant crowd. 

The favorite property is the Past. After reading this 
book through (a Spartan exercise) I turned the pages 
casually at various places to see whether the Past appeared 
as often as I thought. I read, in On Hearing a Bird at 
Night: 

Out of what ancient summers of soft airs. 

Christ, Dante, Athens, Time, Roman, pyramid, Phidias, 
are all in one sonnet called Moments; Pan and the Gods 
are in Redemption; and in Encore^ 

This old slow music . . . with dancers who were graceful long ago. 
Does Mr. Morton make a confession in Inviolate? 

For present loveliness there is no speech: 

A word may wrong a flower or face, 

And stars that swim beyond our stuttering reach 

Are safer in some golden, silent place. 

Only when these are broken, or pass by, 

Wonder and worship speak ... or sing • • • or cry. 

The thought seems more penetrating than it is. If the 
present and the future are inviolate to the pen of the poet, 
the past is equally so, and Mr. Morton should quietly 
take to other things. He knows that the past is beautiful 
only through the poets who recorded its beauty — and 
ugliness. The Past is a convention; time is a unity, and 
no fragment of it is less alive than another, unless one 
wittingly puts on blinders. 

To continue our census, this from Transfiguration: 


Museum Ships 

What old historic dust gives back the rose! 
What crumbled empires yield the creeping vine! 

And these from Survival and Ruins: 

Lead back the tragic chariots of Troy! 

The spring comes in to me like spring in Rome. 

I might add, and so on and so on, because Mr. Morton's 
obsession is the Past, and it stalks him like a shadow 
everywhere he goes; although the other commonplaces of 
poetry, the ready-rapture articles of every variety, are 
not neglected, and although he succeeds as little in 
vitalizing the past as the sea. Perhaps for him the sea 
has run out, and the past has been neatly embalmed in a 
general history. There is even a curious indifference about 
them, as if they were a poetaster's shop-talk. 

And, oh yes, the sonnets are very carefully made. 
They are trim, rhythmic, proper sonnets in every respect. 

Isidor Schneider 

NEW FIRE 

A Canopic Jar^ by Leonora Speyer. E. P. Button & Co. 
This is the first book of a mature woman too intelligent 
to be content with gifts already fulfilled and creations 
accomplished. The book, hiding "the hidden thing, 
making protection for Hapi, who is within," indicates 
careful research into the forms of verse, and contains 
poems in various forms. The task of the reviewer is 
somewhat to disentangle the set of perceptions for which 

the development of appropriate rhetoric will yield most 
to her ambition. 

Mrs. Speyer's ambition is neither historical^ evangelical 
nor journalistic, but esthetic. This in itself is noteworthy. 
It is often said that pursuits and ideas must now be 
estimated upon their contribution to the war problem, 
the food problem, or the proletariat problem. If this 
were true, every healthy-^minded man should strive in a 
chemical laboratory to find the secret lair of energy, 
which men will control in the good day coming, so that 
drudgery will cease, and food and power become so cheap 
that they will not be worth fighting for. 

But in the meantime, if conviction fails us, or an un- 
scientific education has forever limited our activities, 
there is a phase of thought in which a gifted woman may 
participate as well as a chemist or war-correspondent^, 
these speculative adventures and flashes of interpretive 
insight, which, when fixed in pattern or rhythmic utter- 
ance, we call art. And if art is to remain as vital as 
protozoology, or, for that matter, as prize-fighting, its 
principal concern must be the search for new form, its 
own lairs of energy, however useless in the end. 

In this search Mrs. Speyer is engaged. For convenient 
examination of the book, I shall take up certain qualities 
in more or less arbitrary order. In the construction ot 
phrase which shall convey precisely a precise idea or 
impression, not a matter of verse-technique alone, her 
imagination is deft. Occasionally her abstraction is as 


New Fire 

sharp-edged as a tangible object: "O pompous cry, O 
puny sin!" These are even stronger, and cling to the 
memory: 

I am the path that my own feet tread. 

Gulls flap unevenly through the muffled hours; 
Spaces listen in hiding. 

Rhythm is of course the special problem of verse. Two 
divisions of it may be dissociated: The first indicates an 
inner logic not otherwise shown, or an emotion not other- 
wise evoked, as in traditional or imposed forms. The other 
fuses with the rhythm of the fact, as that the old man 
walked amid the green rye, so that the old man may seem 
to walk. Movement is duplicated by movement-of- 
words. Coleridge is full of examples of this: 

The moving moon went up the sky, 

And nowhere did abide: 
Softly she was going up, 

And a star or two beside. 


tinguished exponent. The lovely after-battle poem, 
April on the Battlefield— 

And birds sit close for comfort 
On broken boughs — 

Squally and First Snow on the HillSy indicate this ability. 
Curiously, although an excellent musician, she does not 
invent musical schemes which are interesting in them- 
selves. 

The American genius has taken up satire. The axe, 
which has rusted since Swift, but for such bourgeois 
holidays as Thackeray afforded, is used with new intent 
and no reformatory zeal. The bias given to perceptions 
by scorn, not spleen, is recognized to be as true an 
emotional bias as another; and perhaps, in a world of 
newspapers and languid religions, the most pertinent of 

mordant and bewildering humor of her time. It is not 
negative wit, and may not be completely conscious; but 
it strips away all hoakum, however sweet, leaving our 
intent and passion like a shell crusted with salt. There 
are traces of this trenchancy in her verse: 

O bottled widow's woe. 
Standing in ostentatious row 
Within the gloom 
Of dear departed's tomb! 
Evaporated lover's grief! 

A Canopic Jar has unpretentious beauty and clear 
thought, and no earmarks of vulgar success or sacrosanct 
largeness. She seems able to endure the inward conflict 
and sedentary work required even to 'commence art. And 
one may be sure that she will not rest upon the achieve- 
ment of this book, or repeat it in her second, betraying 
those who have faith in her. Already her Magdalene 
ballad in a recent issue of the Nation is a finer episodic 
lyric than any in this book. She is able to create passages 
of such intransient beauty as this: 


New Fire 

Does the heart grieve on 
After its grief is gone. 
Like a slow ship moving 
Across its own oblivion ? 

Who shall say that her fire in the rushes, which gives so 

fair a light, may not come to burn gold? 

Glenway Wescott 

PAGEANTRY AND RHETORIC 

Rip Van Winkle^ by Percy Mackaye. Alfred A. Knopf. 
Two Mothers {Eight Hundred Rubles and Agrippina)^ by 

John G. Neihardt. M acmillan Co. 

The talent of Percy Mackaye lies in the field of 
pageantry; and it is no mean talent, as he proved in 
his St. Louis masque. In pageantry the picture must 
speak louder than words, and Mr. Mackaye unquestion- 
ably speaks louder with pictures than with words. For 
years he has been laboring to find his medium through 
poetry. The sensibilities of an artist, and a laudable 
ambition, have led him to fake poetry; but his words fail 
to augment or enhance his pictures. Until he* practically 
discards the use of words, he will not be a free artist. 

Rip Van Winkle has pageant values rather than poetic. 
Written as light opera, it is patterned in the usual manner 
— dialogues, lyrics, comedy, dance. It lacks the snap of 
light opera, but its pictures and ensembles are distinctly 
valuable as sublimated extravaganza, and poetically 
eflFective as pageant material. The author has a vision for 
pictorial symbolism in broad compositions filling large 

canvases, for extravagant effects to be put across great 
distamres and to register in the conglomeriate comprehen- 
sion of fifteen thousand people. 

The story of Rip Van fVinkle is a tradition. It is 
material for a drama if the protagonist. Rip — alight- 
hearted, humorous, pathetic, tragic — ^is sincerely and pro- 
foundly characterized. Playing, drinking, dreaming — the 
outcast — we want it all to the bitter end, not a sugar- 
coated substitute. Mr. Mackaye's more palatable ar- 
rangement of the story lacks the original tang. His 
tampering with the legend is like changing the theme of a 
play which has made the play. Washington Irving, 
Thomas Jefferson, Tony Sarg's puppets, all retain the old 
flavor. Mr. Mackaye's version is flat, lacks the old 
richness. 

In the beginning of Act III^ Rip for the first time takes 
the characterization familiar to us — a fantastic figure 
without locale. Later in the act he assumes the dialect 
of a New England farmer, and at the close he is suddenly 
transformed by the magic flask into a romantic youth. 

Something of a fakir and something of an artist, Mr. 
Mackaye paints living pictures on an enormous canvas in 
a public park. 

Eight Hundred Rubles^ by John G. Neihardt, is a tragic 
episode compact in scenario but unbalanced in its develop- 
ment. The long speeches, the digressions, and the song 
at the beginning of the episode, hamper the progression 
at the start. They do not, to any extent, promote suspense 


Pageantry and Rhetoric 

nor establish the exposition. In so short a play^ the 
exposition must be precipitated into the drama immedi- 
ately. Without premonition the tragedy is revealed, and 
the play is over before we know it has begun. The verse 
lacks ease, and the flow of line into line; it jolts over a 
corduroy road. 

In Agrippina he again indulges in long speeches, and 
they in turn indulge themselves to the point of licentious- 
ness iri rhetorical luxury. The licentiousness of Nero 
pales by comparison, and the delayed story grows dull. 

The stories of these two plays seem far removed, as 
does the verse; but it is possible that Mr. Neihardt's 
spirit lives and breathes and has its being in the far 
removed. All a poet can do, and all that one can demand 
of a poet, is to react honestly. The sincerity of Mr. 
Neihardt is generally acknowledged, but Bacchus cannot 
be revived by filling his cup with grape-juice. 


THE NOVELIST AS POET 

As the Wind Blows y by Eden Philpotts. Macmillan Co. 

Not a few novelists try their hand at poetry. Ap- 
parently it seems to them somehow the fitting thing to do. 
G>mmonly they write poetry which shows taste and 
literary craftsmanship rather than emotional impulse. 

Mr. Philpotts' book is of this kind. It manifests skill 
in the handling of rhyme and conventional rhythms. It 
has the sense of fitness which has characterized the 

English literary tradition for generations. It has also 
the "poetic" vocabulary and attitude which have been a 
part of the same tradition. For example: 

For June must joy though joy departs, 
And life must laugh though sorrow smarts. 
And buds must break as well as hearts. 

Most of the author's work, of course, is better than this, 
though still lacking in intensity and originality of expres- 
sion. His lighter verse, such as Gaffer* s Song and Scandal^ 
possesses humor and charm. As would be expected in the 
work of a novelist, however, the narrative poems carry 
most entertainingly the rather boyish naivet6 of subject 
and style — Tiger ^ for example; or The Fruii of the Tree^ 
which solemnly offers the suggestion that if ape or sloth 
had eaten of the Tree of Knowledge it might have ruled 
the kingdoms of the world "with kinder wit than man." 
In Tiger there is a good deal of spirit and vividness, sug- 
gested by the rattling rhythm of the opening lines: 

To the barking of the monkeys, to the shrieking of the birds; 
To the bellow of the bison and stampeding of the herds; 
At fiery edge of sunset, from the jungle to the wold. 
Death stalks in shining ebony and orange-tawny gold. 

N. A. C. 

THE PROFESSOR AS CRITIC 

The Function of the Poet and Other Essays^ by James Rus- 
sell Lowell. Houghton Mifflin Co. 

The Kinds of Poetry and Other Essays y by John Erskine. 
Duffield & Co. 


The Professor as Critic 

James Russell Lowell, during his Harvard period, was 
the leading professor of English literature in the United 
States. John Erskine, now professor of English in Co- 
lumbia, has a distinguished position in academic circles 
of the present day. The earliest essay in the Lowell 
volume was originally published in 1845, ^^^ latest in 
1894. The earliest paper in Dr. Erskine 's book first ap- 
peared in 1912, the most recent in 1920. The two books 
therefore afford opportunity to compare academic criti- 
cal opinion of two quite* distinct periods. 

Few persons nowadays read Lowell 's criticism. The pre- 
face to the present volume, contributed by Albert Mordell, 
admits that some of Lowell's literary opinions **are old- 
fashioned to us", though the learned commentator char- 
acteristically claims that "Lowell, before Freud, under- 
stood the psychoanalytic theory of genius in its connec- 
tion with childhood memories." Whether or not Lowell 
realized the influence of childish repressions, it is certain 
that he is old-fashioned. He speaks a language that we 
of today are not quite at home in and are not interested 
enough to learn. His classifications, his reduction of 
criticism to scientific laws, his rhetorical style, belong to 
the journalism of an earlier day. We shall not again at- 
tire our thought in this sort of raiment, any more than 
we shall wear the kind of clothes that Mr. Lowell wore. 

This does not mean that Lowell's critical work was 
valueless. It was not. He contributed to American crit- 
icism a degree of scholarship and fairness; and, except 

when puzzled by the intrusion of a man of genius like 
Poc, he welcomedy sometimes very cordially, the new 
writer. He did much to turn criticism away from the per- 
sonal blind alleys into which it had previously been so 
often led. He is a figure of interest in the history of crit- 
icism, but we do not turn to him for guidance today. 

Dr. Erskine's book belongs to its own time as much as 
Dr. Lowell's. The difference is that Dr. Erskine's day 
is ours. His four essays make an interesting book, with 
a flavor of sly humor now and th«n which adds a zest to its 
solid value. I think the universities should require every 
student who expects to teach English literature to read it, 
not because it is the best book on poetry of the present 
day, but because it is the best on the subject for the sort 
of person who usually teaches literature. But the pub- 
lishers will probably not get out an extra edition on the 
prospect of orders from the universities. They doubtless 
know that Lowell's book is more likely to get the aca- 
demic orders than is Erskine 's. Dr. Erskine has the qual- 
ity, never forgiven by the true academician, of not l>eing 
interested in what everybody else has forgotten. 

The Erskine book is also suggestive for the poet; espe- 
cially the closing essay. Scholarship and Poetry^ in which 
the author shows the value to the poet of an unpedantic 
literary background. The essay on The New Poetry is 
hospitable to the new, but contains little material which 
the ordinary student of the movement does not already 
know. I must, however, quote one delicious sentence: 


The Professor as Critic 

"Many of the new poems do look at first a bit outrageous, 
especially to old-fashioned readers who have not read 
widely in old-fashioned literature/' 

Lowell was in tune with his time, and Erskine is with 
his. It is unfortunate that much academic criticism of 
today is living in Lowell's time instead of Erskine 's. 

Nelson Antrim Crawford 

NOTES 

Mr. Wallace Stevens, of Hartford, G)nn., has appeared often in 
Poetry since I9i4. Two years ago his Peeksniffiana received the 
Levtnson Prize. Mr. Stevens has been a frequent and valued contributor 
to the special magazines, but he has not yet yielded to the solicitation of 
his admirers so far as to publish a volume. 

H. D. (Mrs. Richard Aldington), originally of Philadelphia but now 
usually resident in England, is also a familiar contributor since her first 
appearance in Poetry's fourth number. Her book, Sea Garden^ is 
published in America by the Houghton MiflUn Co.; and her transla- 
tions from Euripides have been issued in pamphlet form by The Egoist. 

Karle Wilson Baker (Mrs. Thos. E.), of Nacogdoches, Texas, is the 
author of Blue Smoke (Yale University Press). 

Miss Loureine Aber, of Chicago, will issue her first book before 
Christmas through Ralph Fletcher Seymour. 

Miss Louise Driscoll, of Catskill, N. Y., has contributed often to this 
magazine and others. Her tragic dialogue, Metal Checks^ received a 
prize from Poetry as the best poem printed in its War Number — Nov. 
191 4, and it remains one of the finest poems suggested by the great 
catastrophe. 

Mr. Nelson Antrim Crawford, of the faculty of the Kansas State 
Agricultural College at Manhattan, received last year a prize in a Kansas 
contest for the best poem published during the year by a resident of that 
state. The prize was awarded to The Carrying of the Ghost^ which our 
readers will remember. 

Miriam Allen deFord, who recently married Mr. Maynard Shipley, is 

now a resident of San Francisco. She has written verse and prose for 
the radical papers. 

Other contributors appear for the first time in this issue. Of these: 

Maurine Smith was a highly gifted student at the University of 
Chicago, and a valued member of its Poetry Club, when she died about 
three years ago. Her friends have collected her best poems with the 
intention of publishing a small volume to perpetuate her memory. 

Mr. Joseph Andrew Galahad, of Portland, Oregon, has contributed to 
various magazines. 

Mr. Grant H. Code, of Cambridge, Mass., is in the faculty of Boston 
University. 

Perhaps we should also remind our readers that Mr. Cloyd Head, of 
Chicago, who contributes the art>theatre article to our prose section, is 
the author of that powerful modern one-act tragedy. Grotesques^ which 
received the Lcvinson Prize in 191 6; and that Mrs. Laura Sherry, of 
Milwaukee, is the director of the Wisconsin Players, an organization 
which has been for years one of the most efficient and enlightened of the 
art-theatre companies in this country. 

BOOKS RECEIVED 

ORIGINAL verse: 

The Blue Ship, by Herbert Jones. John Lane. 

Eyes of Vigilancey by Fumley Maurice. Sydney J. Endacott, Mel- 
bourne, Australia. 

Ways and Means y by Fumley Maurice. Sydney J. Endacott. 

The Contemplative Quarry and The Man with a Hammer^ by Anna 
Wickham. Harcourt, Brace & Co. 

Sonnets to B, B. /{., by Laban Lacy Rice. Richard G. Badger. 

Poemsy by Stewart Mitchell. Duffield & Co. 

The Journey— Odes and Sonnets^ by Gerald Gould. Yale Univ. Press. 

The Captive Hon and Other Poems, by William Henry Davies. Yale 
University Press. 

Curtains, by Hazel Hall. John Lane Co. 

Ireland Unfreed — Poems of 1921, by Sir William Watson. John Lane Co. 

Wampum and Old Gold, by Hervey Allen. Yale University Press. 

Second Aprily by Edna St. Vincent Millay. Mitchell Kennerley. 

In Gossamer Gray, by Oscar Williams. The Bookfellows, Chicago. 


Mllllll 



'"iiiii 



TTTTTTI 



TEN BOOKS OF 
POEMS FOR $5 

WITH A FREE CX)PY 

OF "RENASCENCE" BY 

EDNA ST. VINCENT MILLAY 

Q. I have several thousand 
books of poems in my cellar. 
Send $5 and I will niail you 
postpaid, ten different volumes, 
and a free copy of ""Renas^ 
cence**, the most beautiful 
poems ever written by an 
American, published at $2.00. 

MITCHEIX KBNNERLEY 

489 PARK AVENUE, NEWYORK 



II II II II IIHIII I IIIM II IIIII I IIIIIIim i MI I 



BOUND VOLUMES 
of POETRY 

G>niplete volumes of POETRY bound in buckram with 

Index and Title Page 
Vol. 1— October, 1912 {ReprifU) to March, 1913....$2.7S 
All Other Volumes, II-XVII, each 2.00 

The bound volumes of POETRY make a well-nigh com- 
plete collection of the best verse written in English since 
October, 1912. No library should be without them. 

Binders' prices kamng advanced to more than twice what toe originally 
paidf the ahooe offer is scarcely higher than actual cost to us. Therefore it 
does not include postage or expressage, which ttnll be extra. Each volume 
wrapped, weighs 1}4 pounds. 

Subscribers may have their own copies of Poetry bound for the 
exact cost according to the binder's' bill (Si -So or more for special 
orders). Or, if they return to us copies in perfect condition, ive 
'will send ne*w volumes for Si.Oo each. 



POETRY 



543 CASS STREET 



 



Are You a Connoisseur of Art? 

Keep up with the times— read PO£TRY 



The New York Sunday Tribune of Jan. gih, i^i, said ediUmally, 
in quoting seven poems from our January number: 
'The varied Intereit and beauty presented are typical of 
PosntT's quality. Thanks to a nu« ootnddence of poise and gener- 
ous imagination, of sense and sensitiveness, it ranks as easfly the best 
vehide of poetry in the English language." 

In the Louden Times of Nov. asth^ iq20, we read: 

'*We need not linger over the many English and French con- 
tributors to this periodical. . . We do have to note that it has 
published, as it honestly claims, much of the best experimental 
poetry written by Americans in the past eight years. . . They have 
succeeded in their primary design— to create a poetry which should 
be American in thought, feelfaig, subject, and form. That is, after 
all, a distfaKt achievement" 

The Chicago Evening Post, in commenting on POETRY'S eighth 

birth£iy, said: 

''No editorship is infallible, but it is rather interesting and 
enlightening to look over the old numbers of Poeiht and to realize 
that the i&nt important chance for publication in America was given 
to many poets, almost unknown, wtko have since obtained fame. . . 
We wonder how many more may yet be helped. Po9TR7 is, so far 
as we know, unique in the length of its life, recognized position and 
rigorously artistic standard." 



Poetry, 543 Cass street, Chicago 

Enclosed find I3.00 (Canada, I3.15; foreign, I3.35) for one 
year's subscription to Poetry: 

Beginning 

Name 

Address 



 



Special Offer to Subscribers 

For an Even FOUR DOLLARS 

sent for a new subscription or a renewal, you may have. 

POETRY for one year (price $3.00), and 
THE NEW POETRY— An Anthology 

(Macmillan Co. — ^$2.25 postpaid), a representative col- 
lection of contemporary verse, selected by the editors of this 
magazine. The latest edition contains a revised, up-to-date 
bibliography. 

''For the envitionine of the range of the 'new poetry,' and a com- 
paritoo of its diversities, there is no other collection that compares 
with this anthology."— J?^«trw 0/ Reviews, 

"The introduction of this anthology gives a most enliahteninK 
discussion of the development and tendencies of the so-calwd 'new 
poetry.'" — From the classified list of contemporary poets compiled 
bv Anne Morris Boyd, A,B., B,LS», Instructor in the University of 
Illinois Library School. 

A university professor of English, one of many whose classes use 
THE I^EIT POETRY as a textbook, writes: 

"It is quite the thing I have been looking for this many a day." 

Or, add $2.25 to the retail price of any book of con- 
temporary verse on the lists of the following publishers: — 
The Macmillan Co., Henry Holt & 0>., MrrcHSLL 
Kennerley, Geo. H. Doran Co., John Lane Co., The 
Century Co., G. P. Putnam's Sons, Richard G. 
Badger, Sherman French & Co. and The Four Seas 
Co. 

You will get the book postpaid and a year's subscription 
to the magazine. 

Send your order at once to 
POETRY - - 543 Cass St., Chicago 



 



HEALTHFUL and INVIGORATING 

DELICIOUS AT HOME 
AND FOUNTAIN 

"Horlick's" 

the Original 
Malted MOk 

Its continued use serves as a health food that renews 
waste tissue and adds progressively to the vigor and 
strength of the user. 

Replaces tea or coffee at many tables. Satisfies hun- 
ger and relieves fatigue at any time during the day. 
Finest quality. Very convenient. 

AVOID IMITATIONS 



MISS HARRIET MONROE 

who has studied the poetry movement 
in all its phases, will consider engage- 
ments for a lecture trip east, west or 
south in February and March, 1922; or 
for autumn and winter dates nearer 
Chicago. 

For terms, dates and other details 
please address 

POETRY 

543 Oos Street, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 



 




Vol. XIX 



No. II 




A Magazine of Verse 
Edited hy Harriet Monroe 

November 1921 
Prize-award Number 



The Lions, by Edwin Curran 
Tlie Jilt, by Agnes Lee 
Poems, by Henry Bellamann 
Jean Starr Untermeyer 
Florence Wilkinson 
Annual Award of Prizes 



543 Cass Street, Chicatto 

$3.00 per Year Single Numbers 25c 



Uiqitized by kjvjkj\C i-^ 



 



I think your July number is. not only the best issue you have ever printed, but 
the best issue of any poetry magazine that I have ever seen. 

William SianUy BrailhwaiU 



Vol. XIX No. II 

POETRY/or NOVEMBER, 1921 

PAGE 

The Lions Edwin Curran 59 

The Jilt I-Vl— The Blunted Age Agnes Lee 69 

From the Day-book of a Forgotten Prince Jean Untermeyer 74 

A Fillet of Thorn Anita Grannis 75 

The Wages of Sin Jessica Nelson North 76 

Fog Kathryn White Ryan 76 

Geyser John R. C. Peyton 77 

Gargoyle Kate Buss 77 

Don Juan in Portugal Florence fFilkinson 78 

The Passers-by Dorothy Butts 80 

The Parade — ^To the Hills around Northampton — ^A Van- 
ity — Audience — Listening — May Basket — The Transient — 
Difference — Please 

Poems Henry Bellamann 85 

Gargoyles of Notre Dame — Edges — ^Lullaby — Peaks — God — 
The Artist 

From Queen Anne to George the Fifth H. M. 90 

Reviews: 



Correspondence: 

Poet and Gsmposer as Allies .... Louise Ayres Gamett 102 

Reactionary Composers Kay Boyle 104 

Announcement of Awards 107 

Our Contemporaries: 

A New "Youth" 115 

Notes and Books Received 115,116 

Manuscripts must be accompanied by a stamped and self-addressed envelope. 

Inclusive yearly subscription rates. In the United States, Mexico. Cuba and 
American possessions, $3.00 net; in Canada. $3.15 net; in all other countries in the 
Postal Umon. $3.25 net. Entered as second-class matter Nov. 15, 1921, at the 
post-office, at Chicago. IlL. uuder Act of March 3. 1879. 

Published monthly at 543 Cass St., Chicago, 111. 
Copyright 1921, by Harriet Monroe. All rights reserved. 



ANfagaziiie of \^e 



NOVEMBER 1921 



THE LIONS 

THE jungle glistens like a cloud — 
Purple-cool, tree-deep, lake-pearled; 
Where lions lurk and thrash and crowd. 

Like lands that battle for the world. 
Behold, one lion leaps for his prey. 

Trotting like a saffron mist. 
As savage nations in our day 
Pounce on some weak antagonist. 

Across the jungle-painted grass 
His roar breaks through the tropic air; 

And he runs like a tawny flame — 
Swift yellow stroke of lightning there. 

His cry is like the thunder's sound, 
Shaking leaf and bough and bole; 

tS9l 




 

And he is part of Africa — 
The yellow monarch in her soul. 

Painted birds fly through the trees 

And stain the sky with brown on blue. 
Hammering with their wings the breeze, 

Hitting songs across the dew. 
Parrots gaudy as a star 

Tap their bells and chatter sound. 
Each insect sweeps his dim guitar 

Like music hidden in the ground. 

The tawny lion goes like a shot — 

A daub of gold against the green. 
Scenting a wounded bleeding doe 

That he is following unseen. 
A spangled serpent lights a tree, 

A coiling flame around it, curled; 
But the old lion goes great and free. 

The master of his jungle world. 

Bravely born and bravely bred, 

Proud as a diamond of his fire. 
This yellow monarch of the south 

Goes like the hosts thatswarmed to Tyre. 
Hungry to kill, he scents the air. 

And roars into beginning night. 
His blond mane tossing up its hair, 

His eyes two pools of blazing light. 


Edwin Curran 



He stops and lips the evening gale, 

Reading the wind across the trees; 
Giant cat in his tawny mail, 

Spelling out the trail-warm breeze. 
Then on he darts as though with wings, 

To find his prey and drink the blood 
And feast upon the harmless things 

That God has put into the wood. 

A gorilla slouches through the bush; 

A leopard's eyes shoot stars of light; 
The deep luxuriant forest hush 

Hides serpents beetle-colored, bright. 
The crane nods sleeping, spindle-shanked; 

Gray monkeys troop and clack and peer; 
A jungle stream goes emerald-banked, 

Purring like a wild-cat near. 

The cinnamon-colored land awakes 

Around the lion fold on fold; 
Yellowing with fruit, blue with lakes. 

Stuck with fireflies burnished gold. 
Gray monkeys watch the lion and talk, 

Lassoing trees with leather tails; 
Some far palms by the seaside walk. 

And near-by sing the nightingales. 

The moon hangs like a petal of gold 
Broken upon the western sky. 

The blue dusk deepens fold on fold> 
The shattered day lies down to die. 

Here in this wild primeval place. 
Savage, wooded, poisonous, still, 

Far from mankind and human face. 
The old lion goes to hunt and kill. 

His prey is near, the scent is strong. 

He roars out in his ghastly mirth. 
There, bleeding like a shattered song, 

His wounded doe is run to earth. 
But as he leaps to take its throat 

A younger lion leaps up and cries; 
And there the two lions stand like stone. 

The fires of ages in their eyes. 

It took the centuries to make 

These lions' sun-colored bodies bright. 
These great-teethed felines from the brake. 

Tawny, crouching, cruel as night. 
Their eyes turn red — these cats of brown 

Swift as wind, lithe as air, 
Savage-maned and monarch-crowned. 

With blazing eyes and yellow hair. 

The painted snake makes not a sound; 

The frightened birds shake in the tree: 
Like two great russet clouds they bound. 

These monarchs, for the mastery. 


Edwin Curran 



The teak-tree groans, the gum is still, 
The coffee- tree nods to the duel; 

An elephant calf stares from a hill, 
A lizard watches from a pool. 

White silver moon, an eye of snow, 

Looks from the dusk with beauty hung, 
Her pale lids open and aglow 

Where starry ladders are far-flung. 
The lions' steel sinews knot in cords; 

There is a crash of yellow forms; 
The zebu and chimpanzee run; 

The jungle with the battle storms. 

A roar that rocks the ground is heard. 

And monkeys chatter, parrots flee. 
The coiled snake and the gaudy bird 

Slink from their everlasting tree. 
The colors of the painted land 

All disappear as quick as light; 
The great palms tremble, and the hand 

Of God draws over all the night. 

The dotted turtles hunt the ground. 
Now rocking with the battling pair; 

The night birds, startled, make no sound. 
The vultures scent the bloody air. 

Hyenas wait to eat the dead 
And pick the polished bones and wail; 

A python crawls with silken tread 
On silver plates of sliding mail. 

The wild things of the jungle know 

A battle of the kings is on; 
The zebras cry, the tree-cats yell; 

The tall giraffe has swiftly flown; 
The spiders hang on polished webs — 

Greenish discs of jeweled light; 
A frog is croaking in his well, 

The fireflies shower through the night. 

The two huge cats are at their duel — 

Two yellow whirlwinds, hard as stones; 
Snapping, biting, wild and cruel. 

Tearing flesh and crunching bones. 
Jaws upraised and crashing shut, 

Lifting, sinking, slashing there; 
Paws like razors slitting skin. 

Teeth like knives of white that tear. 

The painted flowers drip with blood. 

The hiding snake is crushed below; 
The lizard stamps into the ground; 

The trees shake as when whirlwinds blow. 
The monkeys swing away and run; 

The wildcat looks and leaps away; 
The leopard, spotted with the sun. 

Slides by into the mist of gray. 


Edwin Curran 



The poisonous flies have scented blood. 

And elephants have come to peer; 
Ant-eaters look into the wood 

To see the battle of the year. 
The scorpion squirms into the view, 

And things unspeakable, to see — 
Speared and horned and crusted blue. 

The toad and reptile infantry. 

The jungle sees the battle rage 

Intense, ferocious, swift and fast — 
A terrible and an awfiil sight. 

So horrible toward the last 
The lions have cowed the very night, 

And stunned the shadows and the trees: 
A scuffle like the break of worlds, 

The shattering of centuries. 

But the old lion shows greater skill, 

With harder blows and mastery; 
His teeth were longer trained to kill. 

His strength upholds his majesty. 
Yet the young lion is quick and strong — 

So wiry lithe he seems to float; 
He worries the old lion for long — 

Till the old lion leaps at his throat. 

They wave in battle, spinning round 
Together, snarling, thundering, bright, 

Thrashing through the dry dead grass; 

Until the day has turned to night> 
And left the young lion dead and still — 

In ribbons^ mangled on the sod. 
His broken body cold and chill — 

The old lion still his lord and god. 

The old master of the forest stands 

• With one paw on the fallen breast — 
The monarch of the jungle lands 

Whose victory challenges the best. 
A king is dead — long live the king! 

He roars, his eyes like coals aglow. 
He calls his mate, a lioness there, 

To come and feast and eat the doe. 

He calls his lady through the night, 

And she replies and comes to him, 
Where the dead doe lies still and white, 

To banquet in the shadows dim: 
Like nations, when the war is done. 

Who gather at the feasting board 
To dine upon the hard-won prey, 

Each like a monarch and a lord. 

The snake slips back into his tree. 
The monkeys chatter now in peace; 

And over the blue woods there falls 
The age-old night of centuries. 


Edwin Curran 



The fireflies hang their lanterns back 
To star the dark; the beetles bell; 

The lizards creep, and nigh thirds sing; 
The snail is dancing in his shell. 

The yellow floods are still and quiet; 

The sky is blue like trembling glass; 
Beasts, birds and toads and insects riot 

Beneath the stars in jungle grass. 
After the battle night alone; 

Moon-mist, ghostly poison-flowers; 
Trumpeting of beasts that moan 

Through creeping crawling crimson hours. 

A shaky moon rocks in the night, 

A grumbling sea, far palms, the crash 
Of monkeys chattering as they fight; 

Gray serpents going like a flash; 
Slow turtles, swifter bats on wing; 

Worms creeping back, and spiders, flies; 
Lizards with poisonous following, 

And fanged things in their paradise. 

Slimy silken bellies squirming. 

Offal-scented beasts of prey; 
Hungry, lethal toads and reptiles 

Who move by night and hide by day: 
Tearing flesh of birds that nest. 

Rending bones that drip with blood. 

So the jackals strike and quest 
In the world's jungle brotherhood. 

But must these creepers in their turn 

Be conquered in the coming lights 
As new hope rises on the world 

And the old lions go with the night? 
Yet who can tell what signs of death 

Await the nations one by one? 
Ah^ what will happen in earth's dark night 

Before the rising of the sun? 

Edwin Curran 




THE JILT 



Let other feet go drudging 

About the house he built! 
A free girl, a jilted girl — 

I'm glad he was a jilt. 

We quarrelled till it almost 
Destroyed my breath of life. 

He nagged me and bullied me> 
As if Vd been his wife. 

II 

We grew cold and bitter 
The more we would explain, 

And if we held our tongues 
The worse it was again. 

He flashed a cruel sign, 

I flashed a cruel word, 
And neither could forget 

The blame the other heard. 

Ill 

But his eyes could be tender with love, and his voice — 
how tender! 
Some words he sang are with me the whole day through. 

I hang out the linen and burnish the brass and copper, 
And they won't go out of my head, whatever I do. 

Strange how they come when I feel alone and forsaken, 
How they wake me up when the dawn in my room is 
hazy, 
How they drug me asleep when the night has darkened my 
pillow! 
Ah, a song will sing in your head when your heart is 
crazy! 

IV 

What can I do but sit here and shake 

And let the windows rattle mournfully. 
While Sunday brings him never and Monday brings him 
not. 

And winter hides the town away from me? — 

Dreaming how he drew my soul from my lips. 

Seeming just to hear forevermore 
What my heart tells the clock, what the clock tells my 
heart. 

Dreaming back the springtime at my door? 



Why should I curl my hair for him? 

He said the trouble couldn't be mended. 
He said it must be good-by and go; 

And he took up his hat, and all was ended. 


Agnes Lee 

So all was over. And Tm not dead! 

And I've shed all the tears Fm going to shed! 

And now he's wanting to come again? 

Perhaps he's sorry, perhaps he misses 
The hill-top girl. Well, let him come! 

But no more love and no more kisses — 
Whatever the future, gay or grim. 
Why should I curl my hair for him? 

VI 

I shall go out in the sun today. 
I don't know whether to laugh or pray, 
For along the waking paths of spring 
Bird calls to bird till the branches ring. 

Something stirs me — spring's own will — 
To wander to the edge of the hill. 
Where I can see as I look down 
Patches of green on the gray old town. 

THE BLUNTED AGE 

[The old man sips his broth and reads his paper before 
the fire. His daughters whisper at a window. One of them 
holds a letter.] 

First Daughter 

I dread his knowing. 

Second Daughter 

She was his favorite sister — 

Older than he, and very far away. 

Think of it — no one with her at the last! 

Better delay the telling . . . such a sorrow . . . 
First Daughter 

Ah, you remember how he loved our mother! 

And yet, last summer, after she had died 

He never seemed to take it hard at ail. 

He seemed too much resigned, too much himself. 

It would have killed him twenty years ago! 
Second Daughter 

It is the age they come to. Something goes out, 

Goes mercifully out. I often think 

They learn to take death as they take their broth. 

Their daily walk, their game of solitaire. 
First Daughter 

And you and I, sister? Already youth 

Slips far and far behind us. Shall we, too . . . ? 
Second Daughter [Tearfully] 

How can you say it? How can you say it? Oh! 
First Daughter 

Here comes old Nurse Lucretia up the street, 

Heavy with her dull robes, and hurrying 

To be the first to bear the word to him. 
Second Daughter 

Sign to her, wave her away, wave her away! 

He has seen her close so many dead eyes! 


Agnes Lee 

First Daughter No, 

She has passed along, she was not coming in. 
Second Daughter 

Hush, he may hear! 
First Daughter His mind is on his paper. 

Second Daughter 

Make some good reason, take the paper from him 

Before he reads • . . the names. Who knows but 
hers 

Might be already there? 
First Daughter It is too late. 

His finger finds the column. 
The Old Man [Calling] Here! See here! 

Why, Adelaide is dead! My sister Adelaide! 
Daughters 

O father, father! 
The Old Man I suppose it's true. 

First Daughter 

A letter came. Now read it, deary, read it. 
The Old Man 

No, let it wait. So Adelaide is dead! 

Well, she was restless — go and go she must. 

First to this place, then that place, till at last 

She settled in Nevada. As for me. 

Here I am still, and I shall count my hundred. 

Well, well, well, well, so Adelaide is dead! 

Agnes Lee 


 . 




 

FROM THE DAY-BOOK OF A FORGOTTEN 
PRINCE 

My father is happy or we should be poor. 
His gateway is wide, and the folk of the moor 
Come singing so gaily right up to the door. 

We live in a castle that's dingy and old; ' 
The casements are broken^ the corridors cold, 
The larder is empty, the cook is a scold. 

But father can dance, and his singing is loud. 
From meadow and highway there's always a crowd 
That gathers to hear him, and this makes him proud. 

He roars out a song in a voice that is sweet — 
Of grandeur that's gone, rare viands to eat, 
And treasure that used to be laid at his feet. 

He picks up his robe, faded, wrinkled and torn. 
Though banded in ermine, moth-eaten and worn. 
And held at the throat by a twisted old thorn. 

He leaps in the air with a rickety grace. 

And a kingly old smile illumines his face. 

While he fondles his beard and stares off into space. 

The villagers laugh, then look quickly away. 
And some of them kneel in the orchard to pray. 
I often hear whispers: "The old king is fey." 


Jean Starr Untermeyer 

But after they're gone, we shall find, if you please, 
White loaves and a pigeon, and honey and cheese. 
And wine that we drink while I sit on his knees. 

And, while he sups, he will feed me and tell 

Of Mother, whom men used to call "The Gazelle," 

And of glorious times before the curse fell. 

And then he will fall, half-asleep, to the floor; 
The rafters will echo his quivering snore. . . . 
I go to find cook through the slack oaken door. 

My father is happy or we should be poor. 
His gateway is wide^ and the folk of the moor 
Come singing so gaily right up to the door, 

Jean Starr Untermeyer 



A FILLET OF THORN 

Tell me, how can I sing 
Who have not tasted pain? — 

Who, having grieved an hour. 
Laugh and am glad again? 

It will take a* winter of frost. 
Aching and storm-filled years, 

Before I am lord of life. 
Before I am king of tears. 

Anita Grannis 

THE WAGES OF SIN 

God the Inscrutable 

Looked on complacently 

The while young Denison 

Slipped all his debts by careful insolvency, 

Broke his wife's heart, and ruined the serving girl. 

But Lobster Salad and Iced Watermelon — 

That was too much for even a godhead: 

"I'll smite him for that," quoth God the Inscrutable. 

And the wretch died in torment 

At two in the morning. 

Jessica Nelson North 



FOG 

The sea is a meadow, pale meadow of silence 
Where flowers are blooming, white flowers of sound. 
And deep in the petals, the pale listless petals. 
Lost ships fumble grumbling, with blindness half crazy. 

Does He muse, the Creator, as He peers in the vapor ?- 
"So bumble bees trouble the heart of the daisy." 

Kathryn White Ryan 




GEYSER 

Presto!— 

A crystal dancer 

Shimmers into the air, 

Waving veils of mist. 

Stricken, 

She quivers — 

Sinks — 

Falling upon herself, 

Dead. 

John R. C. Peyton 

GARGOYLE 

Your tongue hangs out, 

You gloat 

And shout. 

You leer a ribald sophistry 

At me. 

From where, 

Half goat. 

You stare 

And lean in horizontal glee. 

Kate Buss 



[77^ 




 

DON JUAN IN PORTUGAL 

At every pelhourinho's ledge 
Faces to set my teeth on edge — 
Gray gossips, like a dusty hedge. 
Whisper and crackle. 

I lean at Alcobaca, dim 

Wth fig-leaves twisted round its rim. 

Pauses a slim 

Tall maid. Her name? — ^A Latin hymn, 

Gloria da Madre de Deus; 

A white-rose face dipped tremulous — 

A profile carved as nobly clear 

As love-child of Aurelius. 

White-clad, barefoot and straight she stood. 
Vase-bearing nymph ripe to be wooed 
In some delicious interlude. 

What need now to remember more? — 
The tiled and twisted fountain's pour. 
The vase forgotten on the floor, 
The white street ending in her door; 

Her head, a dark flower on a stem; 

Her diadem 

Of heavy hair, the Moorish low estalegem; 


Florence Wilkinson 

Outside, the stillness and white glare 
Of Alcobaca's noonday square; 
My hands that dare — 
The beauty of her loosened hair: 

White shift, white door, the white still street; 
Her lips, her arms, her throat, her feet; 
After a while — the bread and meat, 

A dewy jar of cool red wine, 
Olives that glisten wet with brine. 
White rose of Alcobaca — mine — 
We kiss again above the wine! 

The red wine drunk, the broken crust. 

We parted as all lovers must. 

Madre in gloriuy be* thou just 

To that frail glory — 

A white rose fallen into dust! 

Florence Wilkinson 


THE PASSERS-BY 

THE PARADE 

Faces, laughing and torch-lit, 

Passing and passing — 

Laughing and torch-lit and passing! 

Voices, crying and shouting, 

Dying and dying — 

Crying and shouting and dying! 

Drums, beating and thumping. 

Retreating, retreating — 

Beating and thumping, retreating! 

Gone! There remains but the heat 
Of the August night-wind • 
Blowing a leaf down the street. 

TO THE HILLS AROUND NORTHAMPTON 

Little New England hills. 

How tenderly 

You gather in this bit of world 

To comfort me. 

Encircling all I love 

As I would do 

Had arms the reach of heart! 

Small hills of blue, 


Dorothy Butts 

If, having grown to be 

More tall than you, 

I shall be forced to see 

The farther view. 

How shall I feel 

The solace of your rounded form against the sky, 

Unless I kneel? 

A VANITY 

It is a vanity to make 

The little waves on my small lake 

Speak from their "deep spring depths." 

What can they have to say. 

Blown down the winking bay 

The first half of the day. 

Blown back all afternoon? 

See — in the early moon. 

Wind-driven home, they leap 

And scramble on the shore — 

And sleep. 

AUDIENCE 

Of what account the leafing trees — 

Dead leaves in autumn? What were these. 

Were there no poet's heart to please? 

Of you and me what can be said. 
Who are not, are, and then are dead — 
Without a poet overhead? 

[8i] 




 

LISTENING 

Into the night I sent my call 
For you, and hung my head 
When there was no reply. 

Tonight the singing sky 

Is calling me instead — 

Cry upon ringing cry. 

Although I do not hear your voice. 

My head is high. 



MAY BASKET 

I love you, dear; 
And all the little world 
Loves my simplicity. 

For in my love 

There are no passions whirled 

In wild complexity. 

No mystery 

Of "Docs she love?" and "Whom?' 

Needs fathoming. 

I gather love, 

And ever find more room 

For gathering. 


Dorothy Butts 

Will you take this basketful today, 
Of old love and new flowerets, and say, 
"This much she loved me during May?" 

THE TRANSIENT 

Dear, take my love and do not hesitate. 
You think that I shall always wait, 
I am so calm. 

(It is to reassure, and to inspire 
' New confidence in you.) 
Quick, take my love before it is too late! 

Here are my hands held out to give to you 

Their treasures — some old, some new. 

All dear to me. 

Oh, do not agonize me by delay. 

And musing which to take! 

Quick! — ^say I gave them to you, passing through. 

DIFFERENCE 

If you will wander, so shall I — 

In opposite directions ply 

Our irresistible two ways 

Into the nights, into the days. 

The east and west shall draw apart, 

Like magnets, your heart from my heart. 

• How vain our tears now we have sttn 
That east and west have common lures. 
You were my magnet — I was yours, 
With all the world between. 

PLEASE 

Give me the old familiar things, 

Though they be very plain: 

The quaint old tune Joanna sings. 

The small house in a lane, 

Whose fragrance meets the open door; 

The faded carpet on the floor, 

The patient peace of furniture — 

Familiar things I can endure. 

I have been brave a long, long while. 

Heard praise, and scorning afterward; 

I have met eyes that did not smile, 

And now I ask for my reward. 

I know the panoramic strand 

Of happiness, and grief's sequence. 

Rough grains have scratched my venturous hand. 

I beg no tribute nor defence; 

I only ask familiar things — 

The quaint old tune Joanna sings. 

Dorothy Butts 




POEMS 

GARGOYLES OF NOTRE DAME 

I watch them shuttle and weave and run 

Like dust before a scolding wind: 

Boats on the water, 

Leaves on the bank. 

And men on the streets and square. 

Leaves and snow and leaves again, 

And men. 

Boats to the sea, 

Leaves to the wind, 

Men to gibbet and wheel — • 

To thrones. 

To bed, 

To P^re Lachaise. 

Muddy tracks in the snow, 

And blood on the wheel. 

And rotting leaves on the tiles — 

The wind and rain will sweep them away 

As a soft curled plume might sweep 

Flecks from a silken gown. 

Shuttle and weave and run — 

Boats to the sea. 

Leaves to the wind 

And men to P^re Lachaise. 

EDGES 

Edges are more beautiful than anything — 

Edges 

Where the quiet deep shallows into loveliness, 

Where the clouds feather to wavering silver, 

And color kisses its brighter self. 

Life is most whitely light 

Where its low edge 

Melts in the still pool of death, 

As the sky-rim sinks 

In a moon-filled sea. 

LULLABY 

Tears for your pink, curled hands — 
They must strain to hold 
The smoke-thin garments of a dream. 

Tears for your still eyes — 
They must be pierced 
By the keen blades of beauty. 

Tears for your flower feet — 
They must bloom like first spring 
On wintry plains. 

Tears, tears for your eyes. 
And pink, curled hands. 
And blossom feet — tears! 


Henry Bellamann 

PEARS 

Quiet faces. 

That look in faith 

On distance, 

I will come to you 

And gaze upon that peace. 

I cannot tell 
If it be wind you see 
Across the summer grain, 
Or the shaken agony 
Of driven seas. 

GOD 

I often spend week-ends in heaven, 

And so I know him well. 

Most times he is too busy thinking things 

To talk; 

But then, I like his still aloofness 

And superior ease. 

I can't imagine him in armor, or in uniform. 

Or blowing like a windy Caesar 

Across the fields of Europe, 

Or snooping in my mind 

To find what I am thinking, 

Or being jealous of the darling idols 

I have made. 

If ever that slim word — aristocrat — 

Belonged to anyone, it is to God. 
You should see him steadying the wings 
Of great thoughts starting out 
On flight- 
Very like a scientist trying a machine. 
Patrician, cool, in a colored coat 
Rather like a mandarin's; 
Silver sandals — quite a picture! 
I can't see him 
Fluttering in wrathful haste, 
Or dancing like a fool. 

I don't go there often — 

Only when I'm at my best. 

I save up things: 

Pictures of the sea wild with white foam, 

Stories of engines beating through the clouds, 

News of earth in storm and sun. 

Some new songs — the best. 

He's fond of being entertained 

With what I choose to tell him of myself— 

Very kind about tomorrow, 

Indifferent of yesterday. 

He's like that— 

God in his heaven — alone. 

I know, for I made him, put him there 

Myself. 


Henry Bellamann 



THE ARTIST 



What would you do — 

If you had ear and brain attuned superbly 

To all the iridescent humming-birds of faint 

And delicate overtones 

That play like spirit flames 

Above the music? 

Suppose your eyes could see 

What mine see when a little wind passes, 

And all the garden is suddenly barred and starred 

With flying color. 

Suppose the tilting planes of dogwood bloom. 

In the green spring mist of young leaves. 

Caught your breath as though a hand 

Held your throat — 

Or that the red haw veiling herself in May 

Kept you awake at nights 

Remembering her bridal look. 

Oh, suppose this world of nuances. 

Opal-soft and frail and swift. 

Were for you a reality more hard 

Than things you call reality. 

And you lived always among the deaf and blind — 

What would you do? 

Henry Bellamann 


COMMENT 

FROM QUEEN ANNE TO GEORGE THE FIFTH 

THE death of Austin Dobson early in September com- 
pelled us all to turn and count the milestones. Was it 
possible that he had lived till yesterday — this artist in 
triolets — lived to bridge over, with his trim little silver- 
silken foot-path, the depth on depth and height on height 
of wild and thunder-echoing change which lie between his 
time, his mood, and ours? Was it possible that a poet 
who reached backward even from Victoria to light his 
little candle at the wax taper of Queen Anne, that such 
an one could have lived through impressionists and 
futurists, through fin-Je-sihcle lassitude and Celtic revolt, 
through imagists, vers-libristes, aeroplanes, submarines, 
Russian revolutions and the world war — lived unper- 
turbed in his eighteenth-century garden, a loyal citizen of 
an extinct world! 

However, in the seventies and eighties Austin Dobson 
was a "new movement." Swinburne had been showing 
what might be done with English rhythmics; now Dob- 
son, only three years younger, would open a fresh chapter 
by following the footsteps of Th6odore de Banville in 
adapting to modern uses the old French forms of those 
fifteenth-century rhymers Marot and Villon. His art was 
of a neatness, a nicety; and all the circumstances of his 
life encouraged and developed its precision, its good- 
mannerly grace. A comfortable little government office, 


From ^ueen Anne to George the Fifth 

with three-fourths of his salary continuing on retirement 
at sixty; a comfortable pension of two hundred and fifty 
pounds for his services to literature; a comfortable home 
and family and "troops of friends"; and a comfortable 
by-gone period to retire into out of this troublesome 
modern world. Too comfortable perhaps — apparently a 
bit enervating; for his books of verse and prose all ante- 
date his retirement from office at the turn of the century. 
Through the last twenty eventful years this poet has had 
little to say. 

A master-miniaturist? — perhaps not quite, because his 
eighteenth-century portraits, ballads, dialogues are 
scarcely the real thing after all, any more than the "period 
rooms" which our master-decorators create today. They 
were done with zest, but not with the eighteenth-century 
faith — their fragile artificiality lacks the true DuBarry 
bloom. A master of vers de societef — possibly again not 
quite, because the master, even in that genre, always 
makes you believe, or at least suspect, that he is really, 
in love, or in joy, or in grief, in some wistful corner of his 
gay but battered heart; whereas Dobson merely plays 
with pretended emotions— he is always frankly in cos- 
tume. And as is the way with masqiieraders, he usually 
makes too many bows and gestures, he slightly over-acts 
the role. 

The poems in French forms also— the ballades, villa- 
nelles, rondeaux, though done with superlative deftness, 
remain literary exercises. 




 

Always in costume, did I say? Before Sedan is a poem 
of simplicity and sincerity, with no superfluous words to 
mar the sad little story. And in this briefer poem. The 
Cradle y there is a quietly restrained feeling: 

How steadfastly she'd worked at it! 

How bvingly had dressed 
With all her would-be-mother's wit 

That little rosy nest! 

How longingly she'd hung on it! — 

It sometimes seemed, she said. 
There lay beneath its coverlet 

A little sleeping head. 

He came at last, the tiny guest. 

Ere bleak December fled; 
That rosy nest he never pressed — 

Her coflin was his bed. 

In the best of the gayer poems also one may find a 
hint of feeling, a kind of artistic sincerity, as in an idyl by 
Boucher or Fragonard; that is, behind the shepherdess 
symbol is a certain wistfulness of dream. We all remem- 
ber The Ladies of St. James — here is the first of its seven 

stanzas: 

The ladies of St. James's 

Go swinging to the play; 
Their footmen run before them, 

With a " Stand by! Clear the way! " 
But Phyllida, my Phyllidal 

She takes her buckled shoon. 
When we go out a-courting 

Beneath the harvest moon. 

This poem seems to me Dobson's high-water mark — I 


From ^een Anne to George the Fifth 

cannot find any other in his two volumes of quite so fine a 
quality. The Ballad of Beau Brocade^ Une Marquise^ and 
some of the Proverbs in Porcelain^ are as lightly touched 
off, but their artificiality is less skilfully disguised. 

It is interesting to note how many of the muse's gayer 
fashions of the last half-century were set by Dobson. 
First, the old French forms, which soon became a fever, a 
mania, until every magazine poet in two continents was 
writing rondels and villanelles — a trick easily learned, and 
tiresome unless turned oflF with the rarest grace. Then 
the library fashion of bookish poems, including the 
Horation fashion of light-winged tributes, imitations or 
free translations in the manner of the Augustan bard — 
fashions so eflFectively followed in Chicago by Eugene 
Field and B. L. T. of happy memory, and still pursued, 
often afar oflF, by every "colyumist" in the land. Indeed, 
most of the journalist-poets would confess that they had 
gone to school to Dobson, and that on the whole the 
discipline had been salutary. 

The name of another venerable English poet leaps to 
one's mind by way of contrast — a poet also born in 1840, 
and now still sturdy in his eighty-second year. Thomas 
Hardy's mind, from youth to age, has looked forward, 
never back. He lit his torch at truth's camp-fire, and he 
has carried it ablaze toward the new age — no abyss or 
peak of change could find him unready or afraid. 

Hardy, in his youth a man of our time or beyond; 
Dobson, in his old age a contemporary of Pope and Gay — 

was there ever a sharper sting of difFerence? The difFer- 

ence between a great soul and a little one, between a seer 

and an entertainer. However, each in his own way has 

been true to his vision. One may grant to each the 

epitaph Dobson begged for himself— 

Saying, "He held his pen in trust 
To Art, not serving shame or lust." 

But one must grant to Hardy also some more heroic 
line. H. M. 

REVIEWS 

DRINKWATER AS POET AND PLAYWRIGHT 

Pawns (four one-act plays), by John Drink water. Hough- 
ton Mifflin Co. 
Mary Stuart ^ by John Drink water. Houghton Mifflin Co. 
PoemSy by John Drinkwater. Houghton Mifflin Co. 

Does Mr. Drinkwater, poet, use his prose material for 
his plays? Is it not the duty of a poet to continue being a 
poet in the theatre? Mr. Drinkwater should suspend 
business temporarily, take an inventory, and separate his 
art material from his merchandise. Strong speeches, 
prompted by fearless thinking, project themselves through 
the mass of his work, but they are in great danger of being 
engulfed in heavy waves of conventional mediocrity. 
Indeed, the proportion of poor stuff is so great that one 
becomes prejudiced against the whole unless one reads 
carefully. 


Drinkwater as Poet and Playwright 

In PawnSy a volume of one-act plays, The Storm de- 
mands some consideration because of its theme and a 
small section of its dialogue. It is reminiscent of Synge's 
Riders to the Sea^ and of course it suffers by comparison. 
However, in this bit of the opening dialogue he has caught 
the quality and rhythm of the Irishman, and it leads one 
to believe that Mr. Drinkwater could write if he would 
orientate himself: 

/iiice, I have prayed these hours, and now I'm tired of it. 
He is caught in some grip of the rock, and crying out, 
And crying, and crying; and none can hear him cry 
Because of this great beastliness of noise. 

Sarah. Past crying now, I think. 

Joan, There, take no heed 

Of what she says — it's a rusty mind she has. 
Being old, and wizened with bad luck on the hills. 

But he fails to sustain this simplicity of speech and the 

atmosphere of the storm, or to develop the tragic theme 

with power. The speeches drag out archaically. The 

Stranger, one of the characters, states: 

I was a dream, 
A cold monotony suddenly thrust 
Into a waking world of lusty change, 
A wizened death elected from the waste 
To strive and mate with eager lords of tumult. 
Beauty was winged about me, darkling speed 
Took pressure of earth and smote against my face; 
I. rode upon the front of heroic hours. 

And through the remainder of the volume Mr. Drink- 
water does not attempt to pull himself out of archaism. 
In the other plays he adds rhyme, which doesn't help any. 

The title The God of ^iet sounds like Lord Dunsany, 
and it is possible that Lord Dunsany might have dis- 
guised the triteness of the theme. The theme — the return 
to quiet, to peace after war, the futility of war, the 
ineffectual result of fighting, the planting of revenge 
which instigates the eternal round of war, peace, war — 
must antagonize the artist. Weak propaganda for peace is 
a just cause for inciting belligerency, and this play is full 
of it. 

Old Beggar. It is the quiet mind that keeps 

The tumults of the world in poise. 
Soldier. It is the angry soul that sleeps 

Where the world's folly is and noise; 
King. For anger blunts us and destroys. 
Citiun. We are litde men to be so proud. 
Young Beggar^ We are fools: what was so long to build 

We break. 

With the padding and piling of long speeches on the 
same theme, one feels that Mr. Drinkwater should have 
followed the trail of his King: 

You god of quiet, some day shall men have spent 
All the wild humorous blood of argument. 

A Nighi of the Trojan War is a tragic episode and a good 
theme, but one is reminded of a better handling of it by 
Henri Barbusse in one of his short stories. Cophetuay the 
last play in the volume, must have been written in the 
author's salad days. 

If one may continue to suggest other authors for the 
handling of Mr. Drinkwater's ideas, James Joyce would 


Drinkwater as Poet and Playwright 

be a good bet to develop the theme in Mary Stuart. Not 
that Mr. Drinkwater is incapable of handling it — the 
following speeches lead one to believe in him. If such 
speeches could grip him and control him to the end of a 
play, we should have something to reckon with: 

Mary, My love is crazed, a turbulence, without direction. It was 
made to move in long deep assonance. I who should be love, may 
but bum and bum with the love that I am not. 

Mary. Daraley, Riccio, Bothwell — there's a theme for a great heart to 
play! And there's so much to do. I have talent — as rare as any in 
Europe. It should be my broad road— that and my love. And I 
cannot use it, for my love is beaten up like dust, blin(ting me. To be 
troubled always in desires — that's to be cursed, not wanton. Little 
frustradons — and it should be the wide and ample movement of life. 

Certain speeches have the depth and sweep of drama, 
they have the flesh and blood of drama; but they should 
be incorporated in another play. 

The prologue is in modern dialogue, but without distinc- 
tion; and it does not insinuate itself into the "dream." 
The dream is lugged in on a dray. It fails to win you 
with its spell because there is no magic. The modern 
characters in the prologue argue a theme old in point 
of time, but modern because it has yet to be developed 
and established. As if afraid of its modernity, these 
characters thrust it back into an old story with conven- 
tional manners, dialogue, and wit. Whereas the vitality 
of the theme could break old molds, and precipitate itself 
without apology into a great, free, modern expression. 

The play ends with the voices coming back out of the 

[973 




 

"dream." This is handled effectively, it has the glamour 
of hallucination; but Mary's spirit's answer to Hunter's 
real question breaks the spell. It would be more dramatic 
and in better taste to let the play end with Hunter's 
"My God! — What's that?'' and leave Mary's answer to 
the imagination of the audience. 

We seem to be passing through the phase of "sightless 
thought" in the theatre — the gathering of material from 
history, from industrial, psychological or sociological 
problems, and making copybook sketches of life instead 
of evoking the unseen through the magic of art. Because 
the art-theatres are endeavoring to reserve the theatre for 
works of the imagination, they are branded high-brow. 
As a matter of truth, the recorders of facts, the chroniclers 
of the literal, are the high-brows, the remote ones. As 
Mr, Drinkwater says in his poem History y feeling, beauty, 
fancy — 

Such are the things remain 

Quietly and forever in the brain, 

And the things that they choose for history-making pass. 

The book of poems opens with Reciprocity y which com- 
mends itself to the reader's good-nature. It is pleasing, 
and springs from feeling. The poem History beckons 
with so pleasant a smile, and is really so charming, that 
one trips gaily over the trite poems which follow, until 
one receives a nasty bump in Reverie. After reading — 

And only beautiful can be 
Because of beauty is in me — 


Drinkwater as Poet and Playwright 

it is hard to press on. But if one is to be a critic one must 
have the unflinching endurance of M, Jules Lemaitre — 
"What if I were perchance doing my part in killing a 
masterpiece!" 

The book of poems has many pages. We have a large 
group in the folk-song manner, two sonnets (we swing 
into their familiar melody with indifference), a group of 
love-poems tempered with pastoral coolness — songs fash- 
ioned circumspectly without unchaperoned passions. 

The long poem, The Fires of God^ goes the way of too 
many long poems — limping, strutting and striding. 
Seven-league boots would compass the same journey in a 
few powerful steps. However, the ambling in Travel Talk 
is pleasant and restful, as ambling in relaxed moods 
always is. And The Carver in Stone^ another too long 
poem, has beauty and an insinuating subtlety in its 
development. The Building is full of nice suggestions, and 
significant repetitions which give heft to its balance and 
harmony. 

Mr. Drinkwater, in both his plays and his poems, has 
many moments of clear thinking, but when he summons 
his naked truth and meets it face to face one feels that he 
is inadequate. However, some of his thought digs so 
deep, and has such power that one hopes sincerely that 
his prayer will be answered — 

Give us to build, above the deep intent, 
The deed. 


C99] 




 

OF DREAMS AND STITCHES 

Curtains^ by Hazel Hall. John Lane Co. 

Comes Hazel Hall with her little book, every word and 
emotion of which is poignantly authentic. The usual first 
book of verse is conglomerate, and leaves its reader with 
the confused sense of having listened outside the tower of 
Babel. But this is the crystallization of a personality — 
one emerges from it as though one had sat opposite the 
woman sewing in her little room, plying her needle or 
stopping to thread it, and talking in a voice at once sad 
and indomitable. 

Her judgment of the world is keen and impartial. She 
knows it by its footfalls. The step tells more than the 
chiselled expressionless face: 

They pass so close, the people on the street! 
Philosophy comes in through the open window. Inevi- 
tably, 

Only one sound drifts up to me, 
The blend of every tread in one. 
Impersonal as the beat of the sea. 

Often the poet's strength suggests itself even more in 
rhythm than in word, as in the three lines quoted above, 
and again: 

The beat of life is wearing me 

To an incomplete oblivion, 

Yet not to the certain dignity 

Of death. 

In CurtainSy which is Part I of the little book, a certain 
wistfulness pervades, something compounded half of sad- 

[lOO] 



 



Of Dreams and Stitches 

ness and half of hope. She is never bitter — even from 

DefeiU she wrenches power: 

Time's soft fingers gently close 
Over my outstretched hand, and in 
Their certain touch I feel repose. 

In Part II: Needlework her touch is even surer, even 
more deft. I know nothing more definitely and delicately 
of woman than this handful of pages. 

Every poem in the little volume is quotable. We have 
selected The Long Day, one of the less familiar, for beauty 
of form as well as for its representativeness: 

I am sewing out my sorrow, 

Like a thread, wearing it thin; 
It will be old and frayed tomorrow. 

NeeJU, turn out; medUy turn in. 

Sorrow's thread is a long thread. 

Needle^ one stitch; needle^ two. 
And sorrow's thread is a strong thread, 

But I will wear it through. 

Then not only will sorrow 

Be old and thin and frayed; 
But I shall have tomorrow 

Something sorrow has made. 

There is something in these poems as personal as the 
warm and vibrantly sympathetic touch of a hand. The 
poet has given of herself with generosity, and she leaves 
one with the sense of being near and intimate. More as a 
confidant than as some strange reader, one listens with 
wonder to her fragile fancies, so musically given forth, and 

[lOl] 




 
CORRESPONDENCE 

POET AND COMPOSER AS ALLIES 

Hear Miss Monroe: As a writer of both music and verse, 
your discussion of Poetry and the Allied Arts in the October 
issue of your magazine has an especial interest for me. 

You quote Mr. Case as to the difficulty of arranging a 
program of American songs fk)ssessing sufficient variety of 
mood and treatment. I believe one reason for this, in the 
case of the individual composer, is that a publisher be- 
comes accustomed to a certain style from a certain musi- 
cian, and when the musician changes his idiom the pub- 
lisher waggles a disapproving head. It is difficult to 
break away from old patterns and be received as the 
weaver of new, and often one's best work is a long time 
finding itself in print. 

One of the reasons operating against poet and musician 
combining more freely is the scant recognition, even 
obliteration, often accorded the poet-member of the 
partnership. I am moved to a comment not pleasant to 
make, concerning as it does my own kinsmen. Obser- 
vation has forced the conclusion that many musicians are 
a somewhat insular folk; or should one say indifferent? 
Surely not ignorant — at any rate, something that begins 
with I. They are apt to have a kind of unilateral art- 
sense, a squint-view, as it were, at creative expression, a 
proneness to feel not only that music's the thing, but the 
whole thing. It is a not uncommon experience to see the 


Poet and Composer as Allies 

text of a long work printed in a program headed by the 
name of the artist who has set it to music, the poet's name 
appearing not at all. Time and again song-poems are 
anonymously printed, singly and in groups, in the original 
or in translation; and the reader is left to infer — if he 
give it a thought — that the words had " jes' growed." 
There is small douht that the verse yoked to music is 
often, one may say usually, of negligible inspiration; but 
if it be given the dignity of program-printing, certainly 
the authorship should be acknowledged. I look forward 
to the time when the poet in his association with music 
will be considered worthy of his hire, be that hire nothing 
more than recognition of authorship; to the time when all 
programs shall print, between the title of a song and the 
name of its composer, the bracketed name of the poet; and 
when all music critics, not merely the distinguished few, 
know something of the fellow-arts as well as of music. 

Music-publishers have done much to accent the value 
of the text by giving it separate printing in song publica- 
tions. William Arms Fisher, a composer of songs and the 
editor of an eastern music house, takes the broad view that 
in a song the words are of chief import. 

The creative publisher of sweeping vision and the will to 
dramatize those visions, can do much toward bringing to- 
gether poet and musician and all allied artists.^ My 
coUabor'atioh with Hdnry Hadley in the writing of an 
oratorio, Resurgdm^ to which y6u referred, was originally 
due to thfc initiative of Mr. Fisher. He' asked me for the 

text for a cantata, and, following his usual method of pre- 
senting his wishes infectiously and with a large measure of 
faith, launched the undertaking almost coincidentally 
with the reading of the letter. When the text was finished 
he invited Mr. Hadley to make the music. Thus was a 
happy unity established: music, poetry, opportunity — for 
certainly the editor or publisher stands for opportunity. 
After the production of the cantata and one other piece, 
Mr. Hadley wrote proposing that we do an oratorio to- 
gether. He said he had ''always wished to express in 
music the sombre passing of mortal life and the glory of 
immortality."' Upon completion of the text I urged him 
to make suggestions, and while he was at work on the third 
section he asked for the interpolation of a contrasting 
mood. Certainly the text was improved by the suggested 
addition. I was kept in touch with the music from time 
to time, being told for what voices in solo, chorus, etc., 
the various parts of the poem were scored. 

There is no question in my mind that co-labor between 
artists increases the joy which should be the well-spring, 
and not a by-product, of art-creation. 

Louise Ayres Gamett 

REACTIONARY COMPOSERS 

Dear Editor: It has occurred to me many times, and 
with even greater force since reading your Comment in 
October's Poetry, that the present unalliance in America 


Reactionary Composers 

between modern poetry and modern music is primarily 
due to the complacency of the reactionaries of the musical 
world. By this I mean not only the reactionaries among 
the composers and critics, but those in the audiences 
themselves, who insist, consciously or unconsciously, 
that our operatic, song and orchestral compositions 
should remain more than a little antiquated, scented 
with lavender, while the contemporary arts are keeping 
pace with the complexities of civilization. 

I am aware that the thought which must be uppermost 
in the convictions of the conservative-minded person is 
that a torrent has swept into modern art, literature, 
poetry, sculpture, and even into the drama; something 
a little ribald, lacking in dignity and beauty as he has 
known it. And it is perfectly proper, doubtless, for 
those who are so inclined to hold back a bit before plung- 
ing into the swirl of this new movement. There is, 
of course, always the possibility that each apparent step 
forward is in reality merely a mood which has taken 
possession of the reasoning faculties among the free 
spirits of the generation, and which will prove in time 
to be just a slight stumble, possibly in the right direction, 
occurring before the next legitimate step of progress is 
finally achieved. 

On the other hand, it is* quite as true that unless there 
is a tendency in the arts to reflect the spirit of the age — 
unless they are vividly interpretive, it is evident that 
they are without constructive value. 

From this hypothesis let X equal progress plus logical 
development, and behold we have those who would solve 
the problem! Sherwood Anderson is the forerunner of 
one group, Amy Lowell of another; then there are the 
followers of Picasso and Brancusi, of Maurice Browne, 
and countless others. Whether or not they gain a foot- 
hold is as much our concern as theirs, for they are our- 
selves, our explanation, the story which the future 
generations shall read of us. And meanwhile music 
stands like a Boston bas-bleu, her skirt a little shortened 
because of the influence of Korsakov and Dvorak, but 
still wearing her New England rubbers. 

This, perhaps, is the explanation of the answer I have 
so often received in talking with American song-writers. 
I have asked them why they do not set such and such a 
poem to music, and the inevitable answer is given to me: 
"It isn't adaptable." Adaptable to what? Certainly 
not adaptable to the music of fifty or twenty-five years 
ago; no, even not adaptable to the song-music that we 
loved last year. It must be something so splendidly 
new that modern music will be able to touch the out- 
stretched hand of modern poetry. Kay Boyle 

Note by the editor: A word of encouragement comes to us from an 
enthusiast who has worked for years toward a closer alliance between 
American poetry and music — Eleanor' Everest Freer, a Chicago com- 
poser who has used effectively many fine modern poems as the text for 
songs. Mrs. Freer has urged especially that operas and concert numbers 
should be sung in the English language and has inaugurated the Opera- 
in-our-language Foundation to that end. 

[io6] 



 



ANNOUNCEMENT OF AWARDS 

For the ninth time the editors and advisory committee 
of Poetry face the agreeable but difficult duty of awarding 
our annual prizes. Nine years ago prizes in this art were 
practically unheard-of in America, although many annual 
prizes and scholarships in painting, sculpture, architecture 
and music had been liberally endowed in perpetuity — 
awards now ranging in value from one hundred dollars to 
two thousand or more, even to the richest of all, the three- 
year scholarship of the American Academy in Rome, 
which carries studio, board and lodging, and a liberal 
income. 

From the beginning we have believed in such awards, 
as both a stimulus to artists and a kind of advertisement 
to the public; and have argued that they are as well 
deserved, and as effective for these purposes, in poetry as 
in the other arts. We rejoice that the tide is beginning to 
turn, and hope that it may prove strong and high. The 
DiaFs announcement of an annual purse of two thousand 
dollars to be given to some one of its contributors is not 
aimed at poets exclusively, but poets at least have a 
chance at it; and the five hundred dollars, with which the 
Poetry Society of America has of late annually crowned 
some book of American verse, has an air of permanency 
although not yet permanently endowed. 

In his letter Concerning Awards in our September 
number, Mr. Aldis asked the following question, which 

the editor promised to answer, or at least discuss, in 
November: 

Could you devise and suggest some plan by which prizes would not 
be awarded for an individual poem, but based on broader considerations 
of personal production and tsJent, youth and need? 

In reply we would suggest that magazine editors and 
other publishers of verse are usually so well informed as 
to the "talent, youth and need" of their younger contrib- 
utors that they would have no difficulty in awarding on 
that basis as many scholarships or "encouragement 
prizes" as they might be entrusted with. Every year 
Poetry has observed this rule in awarding its young 
poet's prize, always wishing it had eight or ten such 
prizes, instead of one, wherewith to aid a little with honor 
and money a few young poets on their stern and rock- 
bound path. 

The difficulty is not here — it lies not in making the 
award, but in getting the money for it. And patrons of 
the arts are not wholly to blame for omitting poets from 
such annual endowments, because this art has as yet few 
permanent institutions to which people of wealth might 
give or bequeath such a fund in trust. The Poetry Society 
of America would accept such a trust with joy, but it is 
too strongly localized in New York, and too academic in 
its present tendencies, to inspire strong hope of its exercis- 
ing a progressive influence. Still less confidence could be 
felt in the National Institute of Arts and Letters, or its 
sacred inner circle the Academy, whose leadership is so 

[io8] 



 



Announcement of Awards 

hopelessly old-fashioned that it has not yet recognized the 
fellowship of women in the modern arts. 

Poetry of course would rejoice to become the dispenser 
or initiator of such a fund, and would engage to satisfy 
any possible donor as to its disposition both during and 
after the continuance of the magazine. Some trust 
company of repute should be custodian, the interest to be 
paid annually by direction of the committee of award. 
In choosing this committee, the first rule should be that 
none but poets, poets of recognized standing and au- 
thority, should be eligible; and, second, this committee of 
poets should be instructed that the original and experi- 
mental work is to be honored rather than the conservative 
and assured. 

The first committee of award might be chosen by the 
editor and donor, aided by such expert advice as they 
might call in. This committee — say of three, or possibly 
five poet-members, to be chosen from widely separated 
localities — should be self-perpetuating, but under a time 
restriction: that is, every three or five years one member 
should drop out on the election of a new one. 

Such a committee of award would not derive from 
Poetry, and the possible discontinuance of the magazine 
would not interrupt it in the least. However, if the donor 
should happen to like Poetry and wish to endorse its 
policy, its editor might become ex officio a member of the 
committee. 

Another method of selecting a committee of award was 

suggested by a lawyer of my acquaintance. Let the 
presidents of three widely separated institutions — say, the 
Universities of California and Illinois, and the Poetry 
Society of America; or Harvard, the University of Chicago, 
and the Poetry Society of South Carolina; or any other 
representative three — ^let such a group of colleges or 
societies be requested each year by the custodian of the 
fund (the trust company) to appoint each a member of 
the committee of awards, such committee-member to be a 
poet of high repute, one not a member of their faculty or 
board of officers. And let this committee bestow the 
award. 

Either of these methods would seem to promise as much 
progressiveness and fluidity, and freedom from local 
prejudice, as any artistic endowment in perpetuity can be. 
It would be for the donor to decide whether his gift or 
bequest should be used for scholarships — that is, student 
awards to young poets; or for awards of honor, so to speak, 
to poets who have done high service in the art. If the 
award should be generously large, the honor would become 
correspondingly conspicuous, and this fact would be a 
strong influence toward the worthy disposal of it, as in 
the case of the Nobel Prize. 

We strongly hope that some man or woman of sufficient 
wealth may be moved to follow this suggestion — someone 
who would like to turn out of the beaten paths with his 
gift or bequest, and do something original and construc- 
tive and inspiring. 

[no] 



 



Announcement of Awards 

^ With this rather long preliminary, we now proceed to 
award Poetry's three prizes for poems printed in its pages 
during its ninth year—October 1920 to September 1921. 
As usual, poems by members of the jury are withdrawn 
from competition — in this case That YeoTy by Marion 
Strobel, a group of seven poems in the February number; 
and Eunice Tietjens' translations, from the French of 
Antonin Proust, of Modem Greek Popular «S*o«j^j, printed in 
November of last year. Indeed, no translations are con- 
sidered for prizes. 

We are enabled once more, through the liberality of 
Mrs. Edgar Speyer, of New York, to award the "yo\ing 
poet's prize," which for the past four years has been 
given, "as a mark of distinction and encouragement, to 
the young poet, comparatively unknown as yet, who, in 
the opinion of the jury, most deserves and needs the 
stimulus of such an award." 

Hoping that our contributors and readers will grant to 
the members of the jury honesty of judgment, and will not 
demand infallibility, we now announce the awards: 

The Helen Haire Levinson Prize of two hundred 
dollars, for a poem or group of poems by a citizen of the 
United States, is awarded to 

Lew Sarett 

of Evanston, Illinois, for his poem. The Box of Gody pub- 
lished in the April number. 
This prize was founded in 1913 by Mr. Salmon O. 

[Ill] 



Digiti 



iized by Google 



POETRY: A Magazine of Verse 

Levinson of Chicago. Previous awards have been as 
follows: 

1914 — Carl Sandburg, for Chicago Poems. 

191 5 — Vachel Lindsay, for The Chinese Nightingale. 

1 916 — Edgar Lee Masters, for All Life in a Life. 

1917 — Cloyd Head, for Grotesques. 

1 91 8 — J. C. Underwood, for The Song of the Cheechas. 

191 9 — ^H. L. Davis, for Primapara. 

1920 — Wallace Stevens, for Pecksniffiana. 

The prize of one hundred dollars, offered by an anony- 
mous guarantor for a poem, or group of poems, without 
distinction of nationality, is awarded to 

Ford Madox Hueffer 

of London, England, for his poem, A Mousey published in 
the March number. 

This prize, or other prizes similar in intent, have been 
previously awarded as follows: 

1 91 3 — Vachel Lindsay, for General William Booth Enters 
into Heaven. 

191 5 — Constance Lindsay Skinner, for Songs of the 
Coast-dwellers. 

1915— "H. D.," for Poems. 

1 91 6 — John Gould Fletcher, for Arizona Poems. 

1 91 7 — Robert Frost, for Snow. 

191 8 — Ajan Syrian, for From the Near East. 

1 91 9 — Marjorie Allen SeifFert, for The Old Woman. 

1920 — Edna St. Vincent Millay, for The Beanstalk. 


Announcement of Awards 

The prize of one hundred dollars, offered by Mrs. 
Edgar Speyer, under conditions noted above, for good 
work by a young poet, is awarded to 

Hazel Hall 

of Portland, Oregon, for her group of seven poems, 
Repetitions^ published in the May number. 

Six other special prizes, usually of one hundred dollars 
each, have been previously awarded: to Louise DriscoU, 
for Metal CheckSy as the best poem of the war received in 
competition and printed in our War Number of Novem- 
ber, 1914; to Wallace Stevens, for Three Travellers Watch 
a SunrisCy adjudged the best one-act poetic play received 
in a prize contest — July, 1916; and four times to young 
poets, viz.: 

1916 — Muna Lee, for Foot-notes— III ^ IV^ VII. 

1918 — Emanuel Carnevali, for The Splendid Common- 
place. 

1919 — Mark TurbyfiU, for poems of 1917-18-19. 

1920 — Maurice Lesemann, for A Man Walks in the 
Wind. 

Besides the above three awards, the following poems 
receive honorable mention: 
Boys and Girls^ and The Way Things Go^ by Genevieve 

Taggard (June and February). 
Down the Mississippi^ by John Gould Fletcher (October, 

1920). 

A Hymn for the Lynchers ^ by Isidor Schneider (October, 

1920). 
Gallery of Paintings ^ by Marjorie Allen SeifFert (July). 
Swift's Pastoraly by Padraic Colum (January). 
Under the Tree, by Elizabeth Madox Roberts (July). 
The Heart Knoweth its own Bitterness^ by Aline Kilmer 

(May). 
Poems y by Yvor Winters (December). 
A Song for Vanished Beauty ^ and An Old TaUy by Marya 

Zaturensky (September). 
Sappho Answers Aristotle y by Maxwell Bodenheim (May). 
Twenty-four Hokku on a Modem Themey by Amy Lowell 

(June). 
Tankay by Jun Fujita (June). 
In Maine y by Wallace Gould (November). 
Still Colorsy by Elinor Wylie (April). 
Adventy and The Comfieldy by Charles R. Murphy (August, 

and October 1920). 
Cape HelleSy by Morris Gilbert (June). 
rVithout Sleepy and The Poet at Nightfally by Glenway 

Wescott (September). 
Communion y by Hildegarde Planner (February). 

(The editor regrets that the extreme length of the 
poems by Mr. Sarett and Mr. HuefFer makes it impossible 
for us to reprint the prize poems of this year. We must 
refer our readers to our April, March and May numbers.) 


OUR CONTEMPORARIES 

A NEW "youth" 

We welcome the advent of a new monthly — Youth: A 
Magazine of the Arts — and wish it high inspiration and 
long life. The editors are H. C. Auer, Jr., and Sam 
Putnam, the business manager is Henry Drews, and the 
place of publication is 70 East Elm Street, Chicago. The 
first number, October, which appears as we go to press, 
contains prose and verse by Ben Hecht, Elsa Gidlow, 
Emanuel Carnevali, John McClure, Pierre Loving, Henry 
Bellamann, Jun Fujita, Oscar Williams and others; and 
pictures by Wallace Smith, Steen Hinrichsen and Fred- 
erick Dalrymple. The list of contributors, present and 
future, looks promising, and the size and format are con- 
venient and in good taste. 

NOTES 

Mr. Edwin Curran, who is a telegrapher in Zanesville, Ohio, has 
published privately two small books of verse, Fhrst Poems and Second 
Poems^ since his first appearance in Poetry in March, 191 8. In spite 
of their modest backing and poor typography, these have attracted a 
good deal of notice from critics of authority. 

Agnes Lee (Mrs. Otto Freer), of Chicago, is the author of several 
books of verse, the latest being The Sharing (Sherman, French & Q).) 

Jean Starr Untermeyer, (Mrs. Louis U.), is the author of Growing 
Pains y published in 191 8 by B. W. Huebsch; and a new book of later 
poems will soon appear. 

Florence Wilkinson (Mrs. Wilfred Muir Evans), of New York, is 
the author of The Ride Home (Houghton Mifflin G).), and of a number 
of novels ai^d plays. 

[ns] 




 

Mr. Henry Bellamann, who is at the head of a music school in G>lum- 
bia, S. C, has written verse and prose for the special magazines and 
music journals. His first book of verse, A Music-Teacher* s Note-hook^ 
was issued in 1910 by the Lyric Society. 

Miss Kate Buss, of New York, is the author ofjevom Block (McGrath- 
Sherrill Press, Boston). 

Mr. John R. C. Peyton is a young poet of Chicago. 

The other poets of this number are new to our readers. 

Miss Dorothy Butts, a native of San Francisco, but now resident in 
New York, graduated last June from Smith G)llege. 

Kathryn White Ryan (Mrs. Edward Ryan), went to New York from 
Denver two years ago, and has since published a few poems and prose 
sketches in some of the magazines. 

Miss Jessica North, who is the private secretary of President Judson 
of the University of Chicago, has also published poems in magazines. 

Miss Anita Grannis, of New York, divides her time "between the 
University of New York and Richmond Hill House, an East Side settle- 
ment in the congested Italian colony." 

BOOKS RECEIVED 

ORIGINAL verse: 

Oui 0/ Misty by Florence Kilpatrick Mixter. Boni & Liveright. 

The GoUen Darkness ^ by Oscar Williams. {The Yale Series rf Younger 
Poets.) Yale University Press. 

Selected Poems, by Yone Noguchi. Four Seas Co. 

Rhymes and Ram^lings, by H. W. Stewart, Alexander McCubbin, 
Melbourne, Australia, 

Mexican Moonlight, by Russell Meriwether Hughes. Richard G. 
Badger. 

New England Days, by Hellyn George. Four Seas Co. 

Songs for Parents, by John Farrar. Yale University Press. 

Yuletide and You, by Henry E. Harman. Stone Publishing Co., Char- 
lotte, N. C. 
Anthologies: 

Irish Poets of Today, compiled by L. D'O. Walters. E. P. Dutton & Co. 

New Voices (New Edition, Revised and with New Material), by Marguerite 
Wilkinson. Macmillan Co. 


The Greatest Poet of ^ * "» 
¥ ^ "^ Contemporary Europe 

is the judgment of the French critic, Eugene Clement, 
regarding Kostes Palamas. As the latter has written 
only in the modern Greek, his work has been slow to 
reach English readers; but since the publication of "Life 
Immovable" in 1919 and of "A Hundred Voices" last 
springy the majority of critics in America and England 
have endorsed the high praise accorded the poems on 
the Continent. The translator, Dr. A. E. Phoutrides, 
has provided critical and biographical introductions 
which do much to increase the reader's appreciation. 
Although the two volumes form a continuous whole, 
their virtual independence is indicated by difference in 
binding and typography. The price of "Life Immov- 
able" is Ja.oo; of "A Hundred Voices," )2.5o. 

'*This voliime [Life Immovable] is doubtless the best English version of a 
modern Greek poet and will prove of surprising interest." — Classical 
Journal, 

"Palamas is a true artist with an eye for all the beauties of Nature and a 
sense of the mystery and wonder of human life." — London Quarterly 
RevtfW, 

"This book [yf Hundred Voices] is a thesaurus of passionate beauty and 
hymns by a man who is a Pantheist, one who utters the 'Everlasting 
Yea' of Nietzsche to Nature and all her works. In the original Greek 
his poems ought to be a priceless and immortal treasure. The transla- 
tion of Mr. Phoutrides is as perfect a thing as can be done. It is a 
work of love and imderstanding. Mr. Phoutrides has enriched our 
emotional and intellectual worlds." — Benjamin de Casseres in the New 
York Herald^ July 31, 1921. 

HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

2 Randall Hall, Cambridge, Mass. 15 West 44th St, New York City 



 



MAKE CHRISTMAS 

Last Through the Whole Year 



What more interesting as a gift than a subscription 
to Poetry, to reach your friend, not once, but every 
single month for a twelvemonth! 

A beautiful poem is the most lasting gift we can think of. 

Your friend will delight with us in discovering new 
poets and new poems. 



POETRY, 

543 Cass St., Chicago, 111. 

Please send POETRY for one year, beginning with the December, 
1921, number, to: 

NAME 

ADDRESS 

NAME 

ADDRESS 

For each subscription I enclose I3.00 (or, for Canada, $3.15; foreign, 
13*^5) ; I understand that the December number of POETRY and 
a card announcing the gift as from me will be sent. 

,NAME 

ADDRESS 



 



Special Offer to Subscribers 

For an Even FOUR DOLLARS 

sent for a new subscription or a renewal, you may have 

POETRY for one year (price $3-00), and 
THE NEW POETRY— An Anthology 

(Macmillan Co. — ^$2.25 postpaid), a representative col- 
lection of contemporary verse, selected by the editors of this 
magazine. The latest edition contains a revised, up-to-date 
bibliography. 

''For the envisioning of the range of the 'new poetry,' and a com- 
parison of its diversities, there is no other collection that compares 
with this anthology." — Review of Reviews. 

"The introduction of this anthology gives a most enlightening 
discussion of the development and tendencies of the so-called 'new 
poetry.' " — From the classified list of contemporary poets compiled 
by Anne Morris Boyd, AM,, BXJS., Instructor in the University of 
Illinois Library School. 

A university professor of English, one of many whose classes use 
THE HEH^ POETRY as a textbook, writes: 

"It is quite the thing I have been looking for this many a day." 

Or, add $2.25 to the retail price of any book of con- 
temporary verse on the lists of the following publishers: — 
Thb Macmillan Co., Henry Holt & Co., MrrcHBLL 
Kbnnerlbv, Geo. H. Doran Co., John Lanb Co., Thb 
Century Co., G. P. Putnam's Sons, Richard G. 
Badger, Sherman French & Co. and The Four Seas 
Co. 

You will get the book postpaid and a year's subscription 
to the magazine. 

Send your order at once to 
POETRY - - 543 Cass St., Chicago 



 



A HEALTH FACTOR 
IN MANY HOMES 

"Horlick's'' 

the Origintd 
Malted Milk 

Delicious and inviirorating food-drink that improves 
the nutrition of all ac^es. 

Serve at meals and to refresh whenever fatigued or 
hungry during the day. AtoM initatioiis at the fonatain. 

DwwM nr m uoxKOF ovn H or A anon 



MISS HARRIET MONROE 

who has studied the poetry movement 
in all its phases, will consider engage- 
ments for a lecture trip east, west or 
south in February and March, 1922; or 
for autmnn and winter dates nearer 
Chicago. 

For terms, dates and other details 
please address 

POETRY 

S43 Qos Stnet, CHICAGO, ILUNOIS 



 



Vol. XIX 




No. Ill 




A Magazine of Verse 
Edited by Harriet Monroe 

December 1921 
Christmas Number 



Resurgam 

by Louise Ayres Garnett 
The Hostage 

by Walter de la Mare 
Neuriade 

by Emanuel Carnevali 



543 Cass Street, Chicago 

.$3.00 per Year Sintfle Numbers 25< 



Uiqitized by \^KJKJ\C ix^ 



 



NOV 38I92P 

Mr, Ford Madox Huefftr, fft iilriWnli/wftij) iTiilfn i Ti poet, naodist and critic, wrcU 
MX lojl Jviy: 

If American periodical literature has today a little peak, a little group of 
joumaU. raisins it to the level of the best of European cosmopolitanism, or at any 
rate in that direction, it is because you and your small paper showed how, editor- 
ially and economically, it could be done. 

Vol. XIX No. Ill 

POETRY/or DECEMBER, 1921 

PAGE 

Resurgam Louise Ayres Gamett 117 

I: Birth— II: Life— III: Death— IV: Re-birth 

The Hostage Walter de la Mart 124 

Supernal Dialogue Harriet Monrt^e 125 

Two Negro Spirituals Fenton Johnson 128 

A Dream — ^The Wonderful Morning 

Handful of Ashes Dorothy Dow 130 

The Captive— Waiting— Futility— Bound 


Autumn Rain — Steeples — Portrait of an Old Lady — ^To a 
Dead Love — ^To Felix — ^April Snow — Solace — Beach Song — 
Song on Death— Out of a Cavalcade of Dust 

Grey Crust Laurence Vail 136 

Two Poems Henry Saul Zolinsky 137 

Will Powei--Pain 

Arpeggio Winijred Waliron 138 

Semper Eadem Paul Tanaquil 138 

Neuriade Emanuel Cameoali 139 

Lake — Sleep — Aubade — Encounter — Sermon — Hope — 
Insomnia — Smoke — Funeral March — Italian Song — Old 
Accustomed Impudent Ghost — Invocation to Death 

Renewal of Youth H. M, 146 

Alexander Blok Glenway JFescott 149 

Reviews: 

A Flourish of Trumpets Marion Strohel 151 


Minor Chords J sidor Schneider 158 

Post-martial Emotion Baker Brownell 162 

Cobr Sonatas Nelson Antrim Crawford 165 

The Prematurity of Immaturity .... Isidor Schneider 167 
Correspondence: 

The Allied Arts Again I Charles Albert Case 169 

The Allied Arts Again II Bertha Wardell 171 

Notes and Books Received 173, 174 

Manuscripts must be accompanied by a stamped and self-addressed envelope. 

Inclusive yearly subscription rates. In the united States, Mexico, Cuba and 
American possessiohs, $3.00 net; in Canada, $3.15 net; in all other countries in the 
Postal Union, $3.25 net. Entered as second-dass matter Nov. 15, 1921, at the 
post-office, at Chicato. IlL, under Act of March 3, 1879. 

Published monthly at 543 Cass St.> Chicago, 111. 
CoprigfU 1921, by Harriet Monroe. All ritkts reserved. 



Bodry 

AMftgazine of \^e 



VOL. XIX 
No. Ill 



DECEMBER 1921 



RESURGAM" 



l: BIRTH 



OUT of the dust Thou hast raised me, God of the 
living; 
Out of the dust Thou hast raised me and brought me to 

the light of morning. 
My eyes are full of the wonders of creation, 
And my spirit leaps within me. 
I behold Thy glory lifted into mountains, 
Thy kindness deepened into valleys. 
Thy hospitable mercies poured unmeasured in the seas. 
In plenteous ways Thou hast devised the telling of Thy 

dreams, 
Entreating beauty from the clay, 
And quickening man from out his dusty silence. 

^Co^yrighi, 1921, by LoiOse Ayres Ganutt, AU rights rts^md. 

Thou floatest flakes of color in the air, land, breathing on 

them, 
Wingest them to life; 
Thou callest the dazed leviathan up from the watery 

reaches, 
And summonest vasty creatures who come lumbering past, 
Astonished at their being. 
Who am I, Lord of Creation, that Thou ishouldst think 

upon me? 
Beside a mountain or a soaring bird, what am I that Thou 

shouldst give me place? 

I can praise Thee, O God! 

I can praise Thee to the summit of my singing; 

With the flesh of me, with the breath of me, with the 

height of me! 
Increase my stature even as the trees. 
Increase my stature till I pass the oak and glimpse the 

towers of heaven! 
With the waters of gratitude I brim my cup and pour it 

at Thy feet; 
For thou hast shared the gift of life, and my spirit sings 

within me! 



II: LIFE 

Into the noon of labor I go forth that I may reap my 
destiny. 

[ii8] 



 



Louise Ayres Gamett 

Sorrow is my lot, and labor my achievement, 
The beauty of God's handiwork my compensation. 
Something within me springs like a fountain and urges me 

to joy; 
Sorrow is as beauty and labor as reward. 
Thou art become a greater God, O God, because of my 

endeavor. 
Listen through my ears, Thou of my singing sanctuary, 
Listen through my ears that I hear Thy silent music; 
Look through my eyes that I vision the unseen; 
Speak through my lips that I utter words of gladness. 
Walk Thou with me, work Thou through me, rest Thou 

in me, 
That I may make Thee manifest in all my ways. 
I will praise Thee, praise Thee with the labor of my hands 
And with the bounty of my spirit! 



Ill: DEATH 

Into the valley land my feet descend, and man may not 
go with me; 

But Thou, O God, companion me in love that I be un- 
afraid. 

The dream of death has flowered in my soul and sounds of 
earth fall dimly on my ears. 

Slowly the sun goes westering in the hills, and the crimson 
pageant of my passing hour 

Flames in their deeps and moves across the sky. 
Something within me reaches back to birth and fills me 

with exulting. 
As the waters of a river, sweep the wonders of creation 

through my being, 
And life and death are so inseparate I know not each from 

each. 

And yet a mighty fearing falls upon me. 

Shadows descend and blur the crimson hills. 

A wind flung from a womb of ice 

Blows from the shores of nothingness. 

The shadows shed their shoes of stealth; 

They run in naked swiftness from the hills 

Calling the hosts of darkness. 

The winds sing a song of fury, 

The winds arise and shout their passion down the world. 

Drained in a pitiless draught 

Are the splendors of the skies. 

Towers of cypress touch the heights; 

Even in a battlement of gloom 

The towers of cypress overwhelm the heavens. 

My peace is perished. 

My dreams are fallen from me. 

Into the night no planet speeds its glory; 

The stars are drowned. 

Lonely the hulk of a broken moon 

Lifts its bloody sail. 


Louise Ayres Gamett 

Merged into rushing torrents are the shadows and the 

winds; 
The shadows and the winds plunge high upon the shore 
And swallow all the world. 

Why hast Thou hidden Thyself, O God? 

Why hast Thou turned Thy face aside 

And burdened me with night? 

Where is my dream of death, 

And where its sanctuary? 

The heat of hell assails me; 

I am consumed in bitterness and pain. 

Reveal Thyself, O unforgetting Spirit! 

Reveal Thyself that I may be enshrined 

In the beauty of Thy presence. 

Drive forth this mocking counterfeit of Death, 

For it is Thou who art my Death, O living God, 

It is Thou who art my Death, and only Thou! 

My fearing passes from me: 

As a heavy mantle falling from tired shoulders. 

My fearing slips away. 

Candles are set at my feet that I be not lost forever. 

Thou hast heard my cry, O Great Bestower! 

Thou hast heard my cry. Thou hast lifted me up. 

Thou hast delivered me! 

Now does the hush of night lie purple on the hills. 
The moon walks softly in a trance of sleep; 

Her whiteness cools the passion of the skies. 

I hang my quiet lute upon her curve 

And let the night winds chant my requiem. 

Waters of peace arise and drift me down the spaciousness 

of silence and of sleep; 
God lights H s solemn watch-fires overhead to keep the 

vigil of man's mystery. 

In the triumph of surrender I take Thy gift of sleep. 
Lean low, Thou Shepherd of my dreams; lean low to meet 

me as I lift on high 
The chalice of my dying. 



IV : RE-BIRTH 

I feel my spirit stir and half awake, 

Then look in bright bewilderment at dawn. 

O waking past all dreaming! 

Love Imperious that hast called me forth from out my 

valley's shadow! 

A mighty whirlwind, breath of the living God, 

Sweeps from beyond the barricades of night, and, stooping 

low, 
Lifts me from out my dust and sets me free. 

1 feel the Power that moors me to Itself; 
That keeps the rhythmic pattern of the stars; 
That spins, like a fiery plaything in the air, 


Louise Ayres Gamett 

The earth that was my home. 

My hour is great with leisure; 

My day is manifest. 

O clamorous world! — thy wasting fires 

Have burned themselves to ashes. 

foolish pomp! — thy futile stride 

As an image in a glass has passed away. 
Time's mystery and menace are resolved: 
The Now of Man is God's Forevermore. 

My heart is as a forest treed with wonder. 

The cymbals of my joyance make a stirring sound, 

My singing shakes the day. 

1 know myself at last: 

Thou, glorious One, hast revealed me to myself. 

As new-born planets sang in ecstasy. 

So sing the voices of my thankfulness. 

I praise Thee! 

I glorify Thee! 

Thou art the Singer, man Thy Song; 

My spirit on its summit shouts Thy name! 

Singer, Who hast sent me forth, 

1 am returned to Thee! 

Louise Ayres GameU 




 






POETRY: A Magazine of Verse 

THE HOSTAGE 

In dead of dark to his starry North 

Saint Nicholas drew near — 

He had ranged the world this wintry night, 

His elk-bells jangling clear. 

Now bitter-worn with age was he, 

And weary of mankind, for few 

Had shown him love or courtesy. 

His sacks lay empty — all save one; 

And this to his affright 

Stirred as he stooped with fingers numb, 

Ablaze with hoar-frost bright. 

Aghast he stood. Showed fumbling thumb. 

Small shoulder, a wing — what stowaway 

Was this, and whence was 't come? 

And out there crept a lovely Thing — 

Half angel and half child: 
"I, youngest of all Heaven, am here, to be thy joy," he 

smiled. 
"O Nicholas, our Master Christ thy grief hath seen; 

and He 
Hath bidden me come to keep His tryst, and bring His 

love to thee: 
To serve thee well, and sing Nowell, and thine own son 

to be." 

fFaher de la Mare 


SUPERNAL DIALOGUE 

Two beings 

Stood on the edge of things — 
Their breath was space j 
And their eyes were suns. 

I It was this way he passed — 
I know the sound. 

// More worlds — 

He can not forbear — 

/ Look down this lane — 
It was dark till he passed. 
Do you see — anything? 

// Seeds of light — glowing, whirling — 
A handful. 

/ Separating now. 

// Fierce fire-balls — 

So many — so many. Will he get what he wants- 
The perfect flower? 

/ Flower of delight — to bloom beside his throne? 
Sometime he will. 
[A pause] 

I Look — that little one — 
Burning, aching — 
Trailing its tiny orbs — 


POETRY; A Magazine of Verse 

II Which one? 

/ See — scarlet — oh, alive! 

Deep in that right-hand cluster near the dark. 

// Wth tiny trailers — will it be one of them? 
That clouded one, maybe? 

/ Look — it foams down. 
The clouds lift — 
There are seas — 

// Lands — a creeping green — 
Sounds of air moving. 

/ Hush — oh, whisper! — do you see 
Dark specks that crawl? 
And wings that flash in the air? 

// Spawn — immeasurably minute. 

What does he mean, the fecund one, creating without 
reason or mercy? 

/ He must — ^life is his song. 
He dreams — he wills. 

// Watch now — they change, those atoms. 

They stand on end — they lay stone on stone — 
They go clad — they utter words. 

/ Proud — they take their spoil. 
Kings — and slaves. 


Harriet Monroe 

II Oh queer — ingenious! They gather in towns, 

They filch our fires to carry them over land and sea. 

/ They measure the stars — they love — they dream. 

// But war — pain — obliterative war and pain. 

/ So brief— each one a tiny puflF— and out. 

// Grotesque! 

/ A few look up — salute us before they fall. 
A few dare face him. 

// Is it enough? 

[A pause] 

I It cools down — their whirling world. 
It is silent — cold. 

// Has he lost again? Can he fail? 

/ Who are we to question? Though he fail again and 
again — 

// Yes, who arc we? 

/ He must go on — he must get the flower. 

Two beings 

Stood on the edge of things — 
Their breath was space y 
And their eyes were suns. 



Harriet Monroe 


TWO NEGRO SPIRITUALS 

A DREAM 

I had a dream last night, a wonderful dream. 
I saw an angel riding in a chariot — 
Oh, my honey, it was a lovely chariot. 
Shining like the sun when noon is on the earth. 
I saw his wings spreading from moon to earth; 
I saw a crown of stars upon his forehead; 
I saw his robes agleaming like his chariot. 
I bowed my head and let the angel pass, 
Because no man can look on Glory's work; 
I bowed my head and trembled in my limbs. 
Because I stood on ground of holiness. 
I heard the angel in the chariot singing: 

''Hallelujah early in the morning! 

I know my Redeemer liveth — 

How is it with your soul?" 

I stood on ground of holiness and bowed; 
The River Jordan flowed past my feet 
. As the angel soothed my soul with song, 
A song of wonderful sweetness. 
I stooped and washed my soul in Jordan's stream 
Ere my Redeemer came to take me home; 
I stooped and washed my soul in waters pure 
As the breathing of a new-born child 


Fenton Johnson 



Lying on a mammy's breast at night. 
I looked and saw the angel descending 
And a crown of stars was in his hand: 
"Be ye not amazed, good friend," he said, 
"I bring a diadem of righteousness, 
A covenant from the Lord of life. 
That in the morning you will see 
Eternal streets of gold and pearl aglow 
And be with me in blessed Paradise." 

The vision faded. I awoke and heard 
A mocking-bird upon my window-sill. 



THE WONDERFUL MORNING 

When it is morning in the cornfield 
I am to go and meet my Jesus 

Riding on His white horse. 
When it is morning in the cornfield 
I am to be there in my glory. 

Shout, my brethren! Shout, my sisters! 
I am to meet the King of. Morning 

Way down in the cornfield. 

Fenton Johnson 


HANDFUL OF ASHES 

THE CAPTIVE 

Beauty that shakes in lights. 
Beauty that gleams in mists. 

Loveliness of still nights. 
Gold of the stars that twists, 

Ribbon-like, into the sea . . . 

Beauty is calling me. 

Delicate crimson flames. 

Jewels with long histories, 
Mysterious oft-said names, 

Blossoms beneath great trees. 
Melodies deep and low, 
Call me. I can not go. 

Heliotrope, jasmine, rose; 

Lovers, at crumbling gates; 
Silence, when eyelids dose; 

Cliffs, where the sea-bird mates: 
Beauty holds these for me 
Whose eyes are too blind to see. 

Beauty, when sunbeams blur. 

Calls me again and again. 
I can not answer her. 

Beauty shall call me in vain, 


Dorothy Dow 



Sadly, from year to year . . 
Passion has chained me here. 



WAITING 

If you should walk in the park and not find me, 

Or go in the market-place and not see me, 

Would you not search further? 

Does not your heart tell you I am somewhere? 

Go out on the long roads — I may be at the end of one. 

The sea to the ship, 
The river to the little boat, 
The cloud to the swallow — 
One for the other, always. 
And I, for you, forever. 

FUTILITY 

The nights grow long and the days cold — 

I dream of you and love. 

The dead leaf, falling from the tree. 

Is not more sad than memory; 

Nor is the rising wind as bold 

As were your lips on me. ... 

(What are you thinking of?) 

The streets and trees and people pass 
Like words beneath my pen; 

Symbols, below a painted sky — 
I have no part in them. I lie 
Futile as footsteps on the grass. 
Wind-torn, storm-drenched; I long to die. 
(You might remember . . . then.) 

BOUND 

Take away the magic 

You have put on me: 
I am held by whispers — 

I, who would be free. 

I who would be free and false. 

Why must I be true? 
I fear to move, for hurting 

The clinging thoughts of you. 

So the sunny branches 

Beckon me in vain: 
I, beside the hearth-fire. 

Huddle to my pain. 



Dorothy Dow 




FROM A BAY-WINDOW 

My world is a pane of glass. These only 

Of the shadowy without are mine: 

They that pass; 

The gray birds fluttering by; 

The cloud that sometimes sails 

Over the chimney-bitten sky^ 

When all else fails. 

AUTUMN RAIN 

To eyes hollow 
With the gray distress 
The passing swallow 
Is all but a caress. 

STEEPLES 

They gaily pass 

Within 

Who would be freed {en masse) 

Of sin. 

PORTRAIT OF AN OLD LADY 

Up flutters a hand to caress — 
Midway in the prayer — 
Her Sabbath dress. 
The frail gray of her hair. 

TO A DEAD LOVE 

Why, O love, 

Shall I not sing, 

Who above her child 

Would plant a flowering thing? 

TO FELIX 

Clear as water pooled in a cup 

I hear your thoughts 

Through all the spaciousness of my unrest. 

You have no place 

For the white bird at my breast. 

Or the face your hands lift up. 

APRIL SNOW 

Oh, your words are bitter to me 
As these last flakes of snow are 
To the little shining buds; but no bud 
That glistens like a raindrop on a tree 
Is so fresh with love. 



SOLACE 



Knock at my pane 
With your finger-tips, 
O rain. 







BEACH SONO 



What arc they weaving under the water? 
They make sheer laces and drag them down. 
They ruffle a lawn with a great grieving. 
What are they making — what manner of gown? 

What are they weaving, caught here, 
Caught there, on the thin-washed blue? 
Who is to be married or who is to be buried. 
Under the water, under the water? 

SONG ON DEATH 

Death comes inexorably. His pale deft hand 
Is never still. Swift and impalpable 
He comes, taking what he will. Life is a circle 
Which has gone its round. He tarries 
Where old women sit, peering at the ground. 

OUT OF A CAVALCADE OF DUST 

In such a white procession. 

In such a guise. 

The dead might return 

With pantomime of lips and eyes. 




GREY CRUST 

I am weary, unto desire of death. 
Of the thought fretting in my body, 
Of the body wrapped round my thought. 

They go — 

The curious panting creatures I would be — 

Along the grey crust of the street. 

I would be fused into her — 
Girl going whither I know not! 
I would have her shrill eager breasts — 
Gusts of storm driving the sail of her blouse; 
Her round polished knees, rising, moving like pendulums- 
Engines urging the sail of her skirt; 
Her sharp bird-like head cleaving the sail of the wind. 
I would have the curious blood of her, 
I would have her dream. 

I would be fused into him — 
Child carried in the arms of a mother. 
Child carried whither he knows not! — 
I would have the gurgling mirth 
Emanating from gay-colored baubles; 
The shiver, the sweat and the nightmare 
Emanating from dark wrangling shadows: 
I would have his untinted history, 


Laurence Vail 

And the hunger 

To seize the whole world by the mouth. 

I would be fused into anyone going new ways. 

Laurence Vail 



TWO POEMS 

WILL POWER 

I would rather grind my teeth to powder, 

I would rather tread barefoot on thin, sharp stones, 

I would rather let the blood of my veins freeze to red ice. 

And the muscles of my legs stiffen to cold stone. 

Than be drawn by the warm breath 

Of transient things. 

I would rather — 

But . . . yet . . . 

I am being drawn ... I am being drawn . . . 

PAIN 

It is 

The hush that falls 

When screaming chords, drawn taut, 

Break with a sudden snap! — and then 

Recoil. 

Henry Saul Zolinsky 


J 



POETRY: A Magazine of Verse 

ARPEGGIO 

September 

The bamboo stalks quiver — 

Only one sways toward the moon face. 

October 

Spider telegraph wires 
Flash from oak to sage! 

Not)ember 

Blackbirds printed on the sky. 
Quick! — erase them for another print! 

December 

Tumble-weeds rolling 'cross lots, 

And tumble-weed clouds on the mountain! 

Winifred Waldron 



SEMPER EADEM 

Cheeks that are sunk and ashen, 
Eyes that weep in vain: 
Always the same passion 
In the same futile fashion, 
And the same pain — 
Forever begun again. 



Paul Tanaquil 




NEURIADE 

LAKE 

Sitting on a bench facing God's beautiful lake, 
A poem to God beautiful. 

Lake Michigan, 

The love a poor sick body held 

(Sifted by the sift of a hundred nights of pain), 

A poor sick body gave it all to you. 

Your absinthe 
Has intoxicated me. 

Having risen out of your waters. 

In front of my great eyes now 

There is a mad blur of sunlight. 

And the City spread out before me calling from a great 

curve: 
"Come, enter, conquistador!" 

The line of your horizon, pure and long, hitched to the 

infinite both ways. 
Where the mist lies like Peace. 

Swimming, I flirted with Death; 
Saw death running over the shadow-laced ripples; 
And turned around, as you threw water in my eyes, 
And laughed at Death, as Death's brother, the devil, 
would. 

You slammed open the doors of the sky, 
And there stood the tremendous sun. 

Lake, gilded in the morning, 

I have come out of you, 

A fresh-water Neptune; 

And the water rang little bells 

Trickling down 

Along my flesh. 

Lake, garden of the colors, 

Sweet-breathing mouth of Chicago, 

Words die in the fingers of a sick man, 

As children dying on a poor father. 

Take my promise, lake. 

SLEEP 

At the bottom of the abyss of sleep 

A black cradle rocks. 

Pain, slight, with evanescent fingers 

Pushes it. 

Under the cradle is earth. 

To cover and stifle you. 

AUBADE 

The morning now 
Is a white corpse — 
The nightmares 


Emanuel Camevali 



KUled her. 
Vainly the breeze 
Wafts a terrible sadness 
Over her body. 



ENCOUNTER 

Little grey lady sitting by the roadside in the cold, 
My fire is to warm you, not to burn you up. 

Little grey lady in your little grey house in the warmth, 
Your warmth is to loosen my frozen arms and tongue, 
Not to drowse me. 



SERMON 

Chao-Mong-Mu freely laid his hands over the sky: 
You do not know how to lay your hands over the breasts 
of your beloved. 

Chao-Mong-Mu made the tree dance at his will: 
You do not know how to hug a rough tree and say 
"darling" to it. 

Chao-Mong-Mu magnificently ran a shaft of sunlight to 

smash against the treetops: 
You walk carefully, carefully, and fend oflF the sunlight 

with your grey clothes, although you're very poor. 

Chao-Mong-Mu painted a sky that was a pink-fleshed 
vase; then he became a very small thing and hid in 
the vase: 

You build yourselves immense houses to live in, and you 
are afraid even there. 



HOPE 

Tomorrow will be beautiful, 

For tomorrow comes out of the lake. 



INSOMNIA 

For a year his desperate hands beat the darkness. Then 
out of their rhythm a monster was created: 

Three claws on his breast, so that he could not with 
facility heave it; 

Three claws on his skull, so that he had waking night- 
mares the year long. 

When at last his hands dropped, the monster stooped 
over him, and with his yellow beak plucked out his 
white heart. 

SMOKE 

All the smoke of the cigarettes of dreamers went over 
to the sky, and formed that blue vault you see up 
there. 




Emanuel Camevali 



FUNERAL MARCH 



The great corpse 
Is the crowd. 

A whole day 

It takes to bury it. 

In the morning 
They begin; 

Not at night, 
For they're afraid. 

I'm here for . . . 

Oh, to wail a great goodbye. 



ITALIAN SONG 



Until your lips be red, 
Until the winter-time, 
Until the money be gone. 
Until God see us: 
Until God see us. 

Until old age come, girl. 
Until the other man come. 
Until the jettatura get me, 
Until God see us: 
Until God see us. 



OLD ACCUSTOMED IMPUDENT GHOST 

That morning the dawn arose from the sodden grey city 

pavements, 
And it was a sick grey breath. 
I had spent myself asking the night for sleep. 

Broken in pieces I was — only the evil spirit was whole 

in me; 
There was a curse on my bitten bloody lips. . . • 
And then . . . 

Oh, then the old accustomed, impudent ghost came in: 
He wore my bagged, ragged pants, and was unshaven; 
And his face was the one I had seen in the mirror 
Too many times. 

INVOCATION TO DEATH 

Let me 

Close my eyes tight. 

Still my arms. 

Let me 

Be. 

Then, 

G>me! 

Let me be utterly alone: 

Do not let the awful understanding that comes with 

The thought of Death 

Bother me. 


Emanuel Camevali 

Your love was not strong enough to hold me. 

Death takes things away: 

I have them here in my hands, 

The rags. 

I do not understand the cosmic humor 
That lets foolish impossibilities, like me, live. 

I have made a mess of it, 
But I am no debtor. 

It's the yearning of a nervous man, 
The yearning for peace. 
The curiosity for a word: 
Forever. 

If she would only come quietly, 

like a lady — 

The first lady and the last. 

Just not to hear any longer 

The noise swelling from the morning streets. 

Nor the two desperate sparrows chirruping; 

Just not to fear any longer 

The landlady. 

Emanuel Camevali 


COMMENT 

RENEWAL OF YOUTH 

THE Christmas season, winter-clad as it is, always 
utters the prophecy of youth. Celebrating the birth 
of a great renewer of life, it rings the first far-away bell, 
waves the first red-and-green banner, to usher in the 
springtime. It reminds us of the perennial miracle, the 
unconquerable hope and joy forever freshly blooming in 
the new life of this earth. 

The passage of the generations — that is the great 
poem. The long epic of birth, growth and decay — the 
struggle of life to assert its dominion over destructive 
forces, the momentary conquest and the final defeat — 
this is the universal story of which all lesser tales are 
mere chapters and paragraphs. Absorbed in our small 
aflfairs, singing our individual little solos, we too often 
miss the immense chorus vibrating grandly through the 
ages — a chorus which accepts and harmonizes the whir 
of the cricket and the long drum-roll of the stars. 

Life's bitter and unceasing fight is against the forces 
of decay: when it lapses, and turns to fight the forces of 
growth, the result is confusion and disaster. Through 
the battering by young minds alone may each generation 
forget to grow old; therefore let youth be free and strong, 
let it have room for its race and its shout, lest bars and 
shackles enslave the next age. 


Renewal of Youth 

The battering by young minds — perhaps an editor's 
office, especially a poetry-editor's office, is the place 
most accessible of all to such battering, the place where 
some of the freest and strongest of young minds love to 
put up their first stiff fight against the forces of decay. 
Too often they find these forces entrenched in the editorial 
chair, so that the battlefield is conveniently narrowed 
down and the issue personified. And the editor, if he 
waives all advantage of position, age, experience, etc., 
will have to put up the best fight he is capable of, and 
often come out second-best at the end of it. 

A recent article on This Youngest Generation by Malcolm 
Cowley {New York Evening Post Literary Review of 
October 15th) shows with what a simple gesture the young 
mind can throw away the immediate past — at least of 
its own race and language. Youth must avenge itself, 
not on the honored dead, but on the too-much-honored 
living; and so we find Shaw and Wells and Mencken and 
all the Georgian poets and prosers — and, oh yes, Chester- 
ton and Schnitzler and Nathan — cast into the discard, 
while youth is reading Flaubert and Laforgue and Huys- 
mans, diving deeper into the past toward Swift and 
Defoe, Racine, Moli^re, even Marlowe, Ben Jonson and 
Shakespeare, and then coming up again to salute Remy 
de Gourmont and certain new groups of French poets 
to whom he showed the way. Through all this the 
young writers are shaping their own ideals: there is to be 
"a new interest in form," "a simplification of current 

life into something rich and strange"; "our younger 
literature will be at least as well composed as a good 
landscape — it may even attain to the logical organization 
of music." 

Form, simplification, strangeness, respect for literature as an art 
with traditions, abstractness — these are the catchwords that are repeated 
most often among the younger writers. They represent ideas that have 
characterized French literature hitherto, rather than English or Amer- 
ican. They are the nearest approach to articulate doctrine of a 
generation without a school and without a manifesto. 

Le rot est morty but he has prepared the people for the 
new reign: 

The great advantage of this generation is the fact that a public has 
been formed. It has been formed exactly by those inchoate realists, 
like Dreiser, and by those anti-Puritanical critics, like H. L. Mencken, 
against whom this youngest generation is in revolt. But gratitude 
is not a literary virtue. 

Yes, here as elsewhere gratitude is the rarest of the — 
shall we say, not virtues, but graces? It is an education 
in a still rarer virtue, and grace — humility, to note how 
easily the rising generation puts the risen one in its place. 
Shaw, Mencken, Dreiser — how they pawed the ground 
and trod the air not so long ago! What rebels, icono- 
clasts they were as they leapt all barriers toward the 
glamourous goal of art! Now conquering youth is 
mounted — soon he will ride them down with joy. Le rot 
est mort — for what happy heir shall we soon be shouting, 
''Viveleroir? 



[148I 



 



Renewal of Youth 

Yes, the wave-movement of the arts is one phase of 
the universal epic. Birth, growth, decay; new birth, 
fresh growth, and yet at last decay — the rule is for you 
and me as well as another, and in each of us it is proved. 
So hail to conquering Youth — even to sacred Infancy 
in its mother's arms! May the newly risen or newly 
born solve the riddles and sing the songs of the world! 
May he rid the earth of war and disease, of poverty and 
ignorance — famine of«body and soul! May he complete 
nature's beauty with the beauty of art, and nature's 
truth with the truth of the spirit, and lead on the mil- 
lennium to which we all aspire! H. M. 

ALEXANDER BLOK 

Alexander Blok's death in the late summer is a loss 
not only to Russia but to world-literature. He was 
forty-one years of age, and had achieved international 
fame only during the last two years through the circula- 
tion of his revolutionary lyric. The Twelve. He was the 
first distinguished Russian writer to espouse openly the 
Bolshevist cause, and was one of the few first-rate imagina- 
tions which seem to have been sufficiently nourished 
upon the black bread of revolution. In his youth he 
was a writer of intense and remote lyrics, full of mystic 
vision and the pungent odor of the flowers of evil. The 
translators point out that Blok "owed a cultural allegiance 
to the old order." But he had from the first, like the 


typical Russian peasant, adored the Christ hanging in 
tormented efBgy at the wind-raked cross-roads, and 
marching before the poor, their Brother of compassion; 
and it was inevitable that Blok should not despair of 
the blind, violent, but spiritual people, discovering in 
their wild fury the elements of redemption. 

For the world of intellectual irony seemed to him 
rotten and ready for destruction. The nineteenth 
century, he wrote, "has cast upon the living face of man 
a blinding mask of mechanics, positivism, and economic 
materialism, and has drowned the human voice in the 
rumble and roar of machinery." As to whether Blok 
felt before he died that the, administrators of this revolu- 
tion were betraying their ideal, "loving Her in heaven 
and betraying Her on earth," opinions seem to differ. 
Certainly there is little likeness between the cold, dedi- 
cated Cromwellian executives who now direct the Soviet 
government, and the twelve mystic roisterers of Blok's 
The Twelve^ writen in 191 8. 

This poem, the Russian edition of which exceeded 
two million copies, was recently translated by Miss 
Deutsch and Dr. Yarmolinsky. It portrays the pro- 
cession, through the streets of Red Petrograd, of twelve 
holy ruffians, looting, killing, singing. The scheme of 
the poem is bold and flexible, including revolutionary 
songs, an episode of low passion and jealousy terminated 
by murder, and penetrating lyric passages with a move- 
ment like the folk-song. There is occasional convincing 


Alexander Blok 

symbolism, as when the old order is personified by a 
mangy cur: "Beatings are the best you'll get." Behind 
all the lurid light and noise is the huge bare vision, the 
flat endless unmoved steppe: 

Hatted Russia 
Thick-rumped and solid — 
Russia, the stolid. 

In the storm and cold the blackguards stumble on, like 
disciples of a starved gray-bearded introspective Dionysus. 
At the end of the poem, they meet their master, in- 
scrutable, pitying, crowned with flowers — the white 
untouched Christ, bearing the red flag: 

In mist-white roses garlanded, 

Christ marches on. The twelve are led. 

The Twelve is a stirring battle-song which will not soon 
be dissociated from the history of these mysterious 
blood-dripping days. The translation, while it gives 
little impression of beauty as English verse, permits 
the smoky fire of the original to shine through. 

Glenway Wescott 

REVIEWS 

A FLOURISH OF TRUMPETS 

Second Aprils by Edna St. Vincent Millay. Mitchell 

Kennerley. 

If I could only sound a fanfare in words! If I could 
get up on some high place and blow trumpets, and shout 

[ISO 




 

and wave my hands and throw my hat! If, too, I could 
gather together all those of my dear friends who have 
said: "Oh yes, I like poetry well enough — Longfellow, 
and Byron and those; of course I admit I can't under- 
stand this modern stuff!'' And if I could gather together 
all the shrugging shoulders, all the supercilious smiles, 
and all those brows which have knitted at the mention 
of poetry, and could read to them — or get Edna St. 
Vincent Millay to read to them, if it were only possible! — 
her latest book, Second April! And .then if I could give 
it to all those hungry people who have not the money 
for beauty, and give it to children — even be generous 
with it! — and let it lie on the library table of the fashion- 
able house, beside the Golden Treasuryy where it might 
be picked up by the casual caller so that he would get 
drunk in a new way! And later, after the shy emotions 
and the jaded ones have had their dance in the sun, if 
I could get away to some deserted place of beauty, and 
hold a solitary revel, an orgy of poetry! 

And yet even if the copies of Second April rained down 
like manna, I suppose there would still be some, among 
the most needy, to spurn the fare, some who would look, 
and look in vain, for intricacies of form, for startling 
words, for grotesque similes, for splashing impressionistic 
phrases. And there would be those who would think 
an occasional sonnet indecent, because it flings high, 
unashamed, the joy of living! 

Not with libation, but with shouts and laughter 


A Flourish of Trumpets 

We drenched the altars of Love's sacred grove, 
Shaking to earth green fruits, impatient after 
The launching of the colored moths of Love. 
Love's proper myrtle and his mother's zone 
We bound about our irreligious brows, 
And fettered him with garlands of our own. 
And spread a banquet in his frugal house. 
Not yet the god has spoken; but I fear, 
Though we should break our bodies in his flame. 
And pour our blood upon his altar, here 
Henceforward is a grove without a name — 
A pasture to the shaggy goats of Pan, 
Whence flee forever a woman and a man. 

Perhaps, there would be some to belittle the group of 

memorial poems, each one of which is so childlike in its 

simplicity — so utterly, utterly poignant: 

Heap not on this mound 
Roses that she loved so well; 
Why bewilder her with roses. 
That she cannot see or smell? 
She is happy where she lies 
With the dust upon her eyes. 

And the stark tragedy of the Chorus: 

Give away her gowns, 
Give away her shoes; 
She has no more use 
For her fragrant gowns. 
Take them all down — 
Blue, green, blue. 
Lilac, pink, blue — 
From their padded hangers. 
She will dance no more 
In her narrow shoes; 
Sweep her narrow shoes 
From the closet floor. 

And there would be the happy young girl who confided 
to me that she could not see anything particularly wonder- 
fill or apt in the sentence, "Life in itself is nothing — an 
empty cup, a flight of uncarpeted stairs." 

To what purpose, April, do you return again? 

Beauty is not enough. 

You can no bnger quiet me with the redness 

Of little leaves opening stickily. 

I know what I know. 

The sun is hot on my neck as I observe 

The spikes of the crocus. 

The smell of the earth is good. 

It is apparent that there is no death. 

But what does that signify? 

Not only under ground are the brains of men 

Eaten by maggots. 

Life in itself 

Is nothing — 

An empty cup, a flight of uncarpeted stairs. 

It is not enough that yearly, down this hill, 

April 

Comes like an idiot, babbling and strewing flowers. 

Yet in spite of them all, and I believe there could only 
be a few — the meticulous, the unfortunates whose emo- 
tions have irretrievably atrophied — in spite of them, 
and right in their faces, I would shout aloud, blow 
trumpets, wave hands, and scatter Edna St. Vincent 
Millay's Second April over the world! 

Marion Strobel 




Fletcherian Colors 

FLETCHERIAN COLORS 

Breakers and Granite^ by John Gould Fletcher. Mac- 

millan Co. 

This volume of poems, while not a definite attempt to 
comprehend and express the spirit of America, by com- 
bining various groups leaves a general impression. The 
spirit which speaks loudest, however, is a universal one, 
although our ardent patriotism usually leads us to confine 
it to America. 

It is a palimpsest which no one reads or understands, which none has 
time to heed, a loom-frame woven over with interspersed entangled 
threads, of which the meaning is lost, from which the pattern is not yet 
freed. 

They are a great shallow sea, crinkling uneasily as if some giant's 
body were wallowing beneath. 

The shuttles clatter and clamor and hammer at the woof of day and 
night. But the being — the thing that will master all the ages — still 
refuses to be born. 

One does not squeeze this essence from the book, 
but finds it imbedded in long descriptions, externally 
conceived; often with the eye of a decorator nicely 
designed, more often with the hand of an artisan who 
labors over his pile of adjectives and colors and leaves 
a jumble. 

Down the Mississippi is the best group. It has a 
sculptural quality in spite of certain passages which, 
with their natural southern heat, threaten to melt the 
modeling into a mass. But it is an excellent group. A 

[iss] 




 

fine conception of a great river, moulded and colored 
by sensitive hands, guided by sympathetic eyes. 

Of his prose poems — The Building of ChicagOy The Old 
South and The Song of the fVind—The Old South is the 
most completely satisfying. It has quality and cadence 
and flavor. It charms and saddens, and leaves a stagnant 
pool in the spirit. The other prose poems in the volume 
work out of inspiration hours. There are some interest- 
ing photographs, some historical descriptions. An eflFort 
is made at times to heighten them to the point of poetry 
by the use of the names of strong colors, but the words 
are cold, they do not flush from within. The lines are 
sterile, and hanging decorations on them does not make 
them burgeon. 

In New Yorky this sentence begins well: 

Ivory and gold, heart of light petrified, bold and immortally beauti- 
ful, lifts a tower like a full lily-stalk. 

Then it grows hysterical: 

With crammed pollen-coated petals, flame-calyx fretted and carven, 
white phoenix that beats its wings in the light, shrill ecstasy of leaping 
lines poised in flight, partaken of joy in the skies, mate of the sun. 

We frequently encounter this violent use of language, 
but for the most part the poet*s carousals in the names 
of colors fail to intoxicate him. 

In The Grand Canyon of The Colorado 

Yellow, red, grey-green, purple-black chasms fell swiftly below 
each other — 

and 


Fletcherian Colors 

hammered from red sandstone, purple granite, and gold — 
fail in their purpose, while 

It was hidden 

Behind layers of white silence 

paints a picture. 

Again, take from The Well in the Desert^ 

The desert below him seems burning: ashen-yellow, 
red-yellow, faint blue and rose-brown — 

and 

At the horizon 

The heat rose and fell. 

Sharp flickering arpeggios . . . 

Not a cloud-flake breaks with its shadow the great space 
of sky and of earth. 

The last two are Japanese prints, while the first is a 
colored photograph. 

Mr. Fletcher's use of colors makes one feel their limita- 
tions; only occasionally does one feel their infinite variety. 

The poems to the eye seem unrestrained, but there 
is not the flamboyant coloring of youth in these pages. 
Taking the volume as a whole, one feels a prodigal use 
of words of color but a paucity of colored words. If 
the Japanese prints, a few of which it undoubtedly 
possesses, were selected from the whole we should have 
a slimmer volume but a more rarely beautiful collection. 


MINOR CHORDS 

Bluestone^ by Marguerite Wilkinson. Macmillan Co. 
Selected Poems y by Lady Margaret Sackvillc. E. P. Dutton 

&Co. 

These two books have no likeness of matter or manner 
that innately justifies their being written about together. 
My apology is that the authors of both are women, and 
that the books are both provided with prefaces so pro- 
vocative that they stimulate attention perhaps more than 
the poetry itself. 

Marguerite Wilkinson's preface is autobiographical, like 
her verses. It invites us into her workshop, as in her 
poems she invites us candidly into her homely house of 
life — into the kitchen and living-rooms and the empty 
nursery — to show us the vistas she likes, her porch and 
garden, her big husband, to chat a little about her ances- 
tors and the poor and the weather, and to confide the 
mournful secret of her childlessness. In her workshop she 
lets us stand by while, between the stages of her demon- 
stration of lyric-making, she gives an informal lecture. 

To report the lecture briefly, for a summary may be 
made in a sentence — the poet may help himself by finding 
the tune which exists for each expression, and building 
them up together. She says: 

What happens is simply this: While I am making a lyric, after the 
mood becomes clear, after the idea and image emerge from consciousness, 
I sing it, and sometimes slowly, sometimes quite rapidly, the words take 
their places in lines that carry a tune also. I am not giving conscious 


Minor Chords 

effort to the tune; nor am I making an intellectual effort to combine 
words and music to get a certain effiect. I am not thinking about the 
music. I am making a single-heartM and strong endeavor to say or 
sing what is felt or thought. 

This leaves one well elbowed for reflection. Is this the 
way epics and folk-songs were written — did the bards and 
skalds and troubadours make their resonant verses thus? 
Is it analogous to the activities of any other poet — say 
Kreymborg, or Vachel Lindsay, in their somewhat readier 
improvisation? 

As for the poems themselves, they are individually 
undistinguished. But a full sequential reading of them 
makes one aware of a bright, impulsive, open temper- 
ament, a small clear voice singing a small clear soul. It is 
frank and personal in the way that women are frank and 
personal, not a challenge but a confidence. It is auto- 
biography as self-concerned and intimate, in its demure 
scale, as that of Benvenuto Cellini. 

Mrs. Wilkinson writes most stridently, most rhetor- 
ically, when, as in the title-poem, she invokes ancestors. 
Songs from beside Swift Rivers is a pleasant, energetic 
group, although it contains the worst thing in the book, 
The Really Truly Twirly-whirly Eel. In Preferences ^ Long 
SongSy Songs of an Empty House^ Songs of Laughter and 
Tears i Whims for Poets and California Poems she does 
better work. These in a certain way satisfy if they do 
not thrill us; they are, if not original, personal. Here she 
is busy on her autobiography; she tells a small old story, 
offers a bright comment. 

The closing poem, however, The Pageant^ is to my mind 

the finest of the book. It is almost the only impersonal 

poem. It is not new or profound; but it is a conceit such 

as comes coolly from the hands of women whereas men's 

hands mold sweatily and hard; also men's eyes are sneer- 

ingly careless while women's are maternally watchful. I 

will quote the second stanza, and take my leave of a book 

pleasant but not upsetting, containing some singularly 

inept verses which, however, may help in the final witnessing 

of an unheroic, untormented and engaging personality: 

Forever is a broad road where have met together 
Brave Deeds in red robes and Deeds of golden fire; 
Grave Deeds in silver gowns, quaint Deeds in modey, 
Quiet Deeds in homely gray that only saints admire; 
Gentle Deeds that love the green raiment of the summer; 
Pure Deeds in very white without the chill of snow; 
Squalid Deeds in dull rags, pitiful and ugly: 
Down the broad highway they go. 

The testimonial to Lady Margaret Sackville's Selected 
Poems is written by no less a doctor than Wilfrid Scawen 
Blunt. It is short and perfunctory, having the familiar 
sound of the literary ballyhoo. It begins by calling her 
ladyship the best of England's woman poets. Being quite 
ignorant of the poetry young Britannia is writing, I can- 
not enter into controversy. But I remember some sharp 
work by the feminine Sitwell; and'some interesting percept 
tions in quotations from Charlotte Mew; and even though 
the women of talent, like the men, are diluting their poetry 
in the traditional English schooner, the novel — Virginia 
Wolf, May Sinclair, Dorothy Richardson, E. M. Delaficld 

[i6o] 



 



Minor Chords 

and others — there must be women who are writing poetry 
less pallid and Hellenic, and more original than this. 

Mr. Blunt, like other comfortable people, is waiting for 
the world to quiet down to "its ancient bourgeois ways of 
peace, prosperity, romance, and beauty.'* We may look 
for the blooming of an art that will cover the ruins, a 
peaceful bourgeois poetry written in the benignant, 
lattice-tempered "daylight of sound rhyme, metre and 
melody," like Lady Sackville's. It will even be free from 
the rhetorical independence of blank verse, which is "not 
really verse at all even in master-hands; say, rather, a 
dignified kind of prose pompous in recitation and, for 
common reading, dull." 

Mr. Blunt is sure it will emerge from the bewildered 
forms of the "delirium" — such profound, powerful, deny- 
ing poetry as is being written by D. H. Lawrence, the 
imagists, the Sitwells and Aldous Huxley. I gather that 
Mr. Blunt means them although he mentions no names. 
Their work is a delirium to him because their subject- 
matter is not the Greek hash served up by a muse whom 
people have made a slavey, but fresh fodder pungently 
spiced that gives savor and nourishment; because their 
measures are ungentle, and their language cleaned and 
filtered of the d6bris of overlapping preciosities. 

In spite of this survivor of the nineties, such feeble voices 
as Lady Sackville's will inevitably be silenced by the 
" delirium." True it is a voice of some subtle cadences; of 
a tone pleasing and serene. It even murmurs some 

[i6i] 




 

exquisite lyrics, offers some sonorous recitations, makes a 
shy jest. But it observes all the politeness of conven- 
tional rhyming; it never leaves its orderly park of culti- 
vated flower-beds exhaling a luxurious odor, with nymphs 
and fauns pensive among the trees, fastened forever in the 
postures of elegantly sylvan courtship. 

There is a staid, deliberate and wise sentiment in the 
war poems. They are not poignant or biographical, but 
they are pitying, even querulous, comments upon an 
organized cataclysm. They are bright bits of emotion, 
like bright colors against an elegant but monotonous 
background. 

Lady Sackville's poetry has none of the impulse and 
swing of Marguerite Wilkinson's. It is impersonal and 
detached, and does not leave us as a palpable presence. 
But it has greater delicacy, mellower polish, maturer 
choice of material. One can see in these books an analogy; 
for England and America, if England did not have its own 
r voltes and America its bland traditionalists. 

Isidor Schneider 

POST-MARTIAL EMOTION 

Aurelia and Other PoemSy by Robert Nichols. E. P. 

Dutton and Gd. 

From the ardors and endurances of war this poet, like 
many another, has retired into his sensibilities. It isi 
a luxury no doubt justified in one who suffered so severe 
a war experience as Robert Nichols, but it is a disappoint- 


Post-martial Emotion 

ment to many who read his first book. From this earlier 
book there were two courses possible: one, to retain the 
war experience, if not its incidents, as a structural fact 
in his future work; the other, to throw it away as one 
would a soiled and bloody shirt and return to the cool, 
sterile delicacies of his domestic experience. With the 
exception of the beautifully reminiscent Yesterday^ the 
poet in this book has returned frankly to pre-war psy- 
chology and subject matter. The book as a whole, 
including. Four Idylls^ Encounters^ twenty-seven Elisa- 
bethan Sonnets to Aurelia^ The Flower of Flame^ has 
assumed in manner, emotion and subject the conventional 
limitations of the finely wrought but minor poetry of 
academic England. 

If war came without welcome, a thick and bulging 
episode in his experience, its subsidence at any rate has 
not left the poet voiceless. The transition from his 
engravings on the crude steel of war to their continuation 
on the ivory of peace is no doubt appropriate to this type 
of poet. Three strains of interest, none of them asso- 
ciated with warlike violence, may be noted: A con- 
templative and introspective interest, as in Night 
Rhapsody: 

How beautiful to wake at night, 

Within the room grown strange, and still, and sweet, 

And live a century while in the dark 

The dripping wheel of silence slowly turns; 

To watch the window open on the night, 

A dewy silent deep where nothing stirs, 

And, lying thus, to feel dilate within 

The press, the conflict, and the heavy pulse 

Of incommunicable sad ecstasy. 

An interest in nature observation, as in From the Budded 
Branch: 

Below a beetle on a stalk of grass 

Slowly unharnesses his shuttered wings. 
His tiny rainbow wings of shrivelled glass. 

He leaps 1 He whirs away. The grass-blade swings. 

An interest in personal emotion, as in the tritely facile 
Sonnets to Aurelia: 

Whatever substances of love may dwell 

Within the passionate heart of such as I, 
Whatever waters of pure pity well 

In the dark orb of a most loving eye, 
I have yielded you. Whatever were the pain 

If power within me so to do did live, 
I, at your need, had made these yours again, 

But now I know I have no more to give. 

But the weaver of these has not yet a certain hand. 
His imaginative facility, his ability to subordinate the 
crude image to the structural idea of his poem without 
diminishing its vividness, his technical excellence in 
poetic detail, do not save him from casualness in the 
larger principles of his work. 

It is unfortunate that Robert Nichols should have 
only the poised and static culture of his particular English 
group to support him. Rarely if ever does he break 
over the narrow boundaries of self-centered sophistication, 


Post-martial Emotion 

of fagged and too mature emotion. Mr. Nichols and 
his group seem to be too little in literary touch with the 
massive energies of contemporary life to be moved by 
any great or unifying poetic idea. The environment is 
luxuriously sweet to the minor poet, but its very gracious- 
ness undermines stronger men. It is too small a pot for 
great broth. In the gratuitous energy of great poetry 
this book is lacking. Baker Brownell 

COLOR SONATAS 

PoemSy by Iris Tree. John Lane Co. 

An organ exists which plays in color instead of in tone 
and pitch. Its invention was a recognition of the synes- 
thetic power which every artist to some extent possesses 
— the power to translate images received through one 
sense into terms of another sense. 

If one could carry the principle of synesthesia invent- 
ively several steps farther than the color organ, and pro- 
duce a device that would interpret sound in terms of 
fragrance, and color in terms of odor, and so on, one would 
have something very like Iris Tree's book. It is, to quote 
her own words, "a kaleidoscope of roaring color," using 
the word "color" itself in a rather synesthetic sense. Such 
figures as "scarlet rhapsodies and beryl-cold sonatas," 
"The pale smell of their falling blossoms," and "Its scent 
is sweeter than ghostly music," are characteristic. 

Rebecca West, I believe, once referred to the works of 

Compton Mackenzie as not precisely novels but brilliantly 

colored cushions. I have somewhat the same feeling 

about Iris Tree's volume — it does not seem exactly a book. 

It is not a cushion; sometimes it seems a tapestry, at 

other times a bouquet of highly perfumed flowers, and 

still again a series of ariettes. This is nothing agunst it; 

anybody can make a book that seems like a book, but 

few can make a book that seems like — well, perhaps "a 

kaleidoscope" is the most inclusive term. The author, 

in her own words, opens wide 

the violet-petalled doon 
Of every shy and cloistered sense 
That all the scent and munc of the world 
May rush into the soul. 

The poems are dazzling, arresting, with imagery now 

a bit Keatsian in suggestion, but more often altogether 

modern. Verses like these represent the author's method: 

Moonlit lilacs under the window, 

And the pale smell of their falling blossoms, 

And the white floating beams like luminous moths 

Fluttering from bloom to bloom. 

Sprays of lilac flowers 

Frothing at the green verge of midnight waves. 

Frozen to motionless icicles. 

Moonlight flows over me, 

Full of illicit, marvebus perfumes 

Wreathed with syringa and plaited with hyacinths; 

Hair of the moonlight falling about me, 

Straight and cool as the drooping tresses of rain. 

The spiritual interpretations which the author makes 
are as unvivid as her imagery is vivid. Neither "the dim 

[i66] 



 



Color Sonatas 

psychic crystals*' of her soul nor her wish that she were 
'"God in a colored globe" moves one to more than casual 
interest. Perhaps this is partly because one looks for 
sensuous instead of spiritual beauties in a kaleidoscope. 
Illustrations and decorations usually spoil a book of 
poems. In this case the decorations, done by Curtis 
MofFatt, the author's husband, have the same quality as 
the verses and add to their flavor. 

Nelson Antrim Crawford 

THE PREMATUHmr OF IMMATURITY 

Hidden Path, by Ned Hungerford. Privately printed. 

It is hard to call this the poetry of a young man. There 
is feeling and experience in it; it is immature not in knowl- 
edge of life but in the mechanics of expression, in the 
practice of poetic craftsmanship. Where other poets can 
amble and even trip gaily and gracefully, in well trodden 
and frequented ways, Mr. Hungerford plods lonely and 
stumbling. He presents almost pathetically the figure 
of a man desperately concerned with self-expression, not 
as a necessity born with him but out of some troubling 
circumstance. I feel that things are maddeningly dull 
for Mr. Hungerford, wherever he is; that he has an insup- 
pressible desire to find a kinder environment. 

That is why opening his book gave me the thrill that a 
man might feel if he picked up a stray message from a lost 
man — say, something in a bottle, or between the halves 
of a fruit. There is a distracting personal interest in 

every poem that makes its status as poetry unimportant. 
And the regrettable element in the matter is that the 
author deliberately aims to achieve this effect. He writes 
in lys introductory poem: 

Reader . . 

That these poems are now in your hands 

Is proof that they are meant for you. 

Whatever your race, color, or creed, you are brother 

To him who wrote them. 

And to him who placed them in your hands. 

It is the old plea of the beginner not sure of his audience, 
the old futile defiance of criticism, futile because of its un- 
conscious confession of a lack of technique. Somewhere 
else in the book, he makes the stock challenge: 

O ready condemners, 

Isn 't it just possible 

You and I are thinking of something 

Entirely different? 

The persistent illusion of being misunderstood (when 
one is merely ignored), the illusion that others in his plight 
may take heart fromhisavowals,istheinspirationof a good 
many of these poems. Throughout, the reader is left with 
the consciousness of listening to a muddled eager man, 
who can hardly resist the temptation to buttonhole his 
few auditors. The very titles of this and a previous book 
— Hidden Pathy Uncertain Trail — give Mr. Hungerford's 
own estimate of his literary journey. 

If Ned Hungerford is comparatively young, he may 
find out eventually whither he is bound, in which case he 

[i68] 



 



The Prematurity of Immaturity 

will regret publishing this misgiven itinerary. If he is 
not a young man and is bogged fast in bewildering cross- 
roadSy the book will be one more of the crowded minor 
fatalities on the literary front. From any standpoint it 
is premature; it may have satisfied momentarily a crav- 
ing to appear in print, but already it must have obliterated 
that satisfaction by coming back in all its gruesome im- 
maturity to haunt its author. It would have been passed 
over in silence; but as it is typical of many books of verse 
sent out in quest of reviews, the above remarks may serve 
as a hint to other self-deceived, and often embittered, 
would-be poets. Isidor Schneider 



CORRESPONDENCE 

THE ALLIED ARTS AGAIN 
I 

Dear Editor: It was with great interest that I read 
in Poetry for October, your comments upon my Musical 
America article. I am glad to have the opportunity 
and the invitation to express an opinion I have long held. 

I believe we should have something in the nature of 
a National Committee for the Protection of the Native 
Lyric from the Distortions Practised by Incompetent 
Composers. Poets, when asked for permission to make 
'* settings" of their words, often grant it graciously and 
trust to luck. What a writer ought to do is to tell the 


composer to make a setting and submit it to him for 
approval. But as few poets are willing to profess expert- 
ness in musical judgments, the writer usually has to 
submit to whatever outrageous interpretation the com- 
poser may perpetrate. I see no reason why a poet should 
not say to a composer: "Yes, you may make a setting 
of my poem, provided that, before publishing it, you 
will submit it to a committee on which both poetry and 
music are represented." Such a committee would be a 
step toward establishing a standard, and perhaps it 
might do a great deal, in ways other than censorship, 
to stimulate the progress of American song. 

One other thing might be spoken of as a possible reason 
why there is not greater co-operation among poets and 
musicians: often of late the poet talks business and pro- 
poses a division of royalty, whereupon the negotiations 
are soon at an end. There are different reasons in 
different cases, but usually this happens because the 
composer knows, if he has ever published anything, that 
the royalty will be too small to divide — a fact which he 
dislikes to confess, even to a fellow-artist. And he does 
not want to be forced to keep books and mail out each 
month a cheque which would probably fluctuate between 
two dollars and six. If there is money in music-publish- 
ing, the music-publisher must get most of it. 

Referring again to your editorial, you express doubt 
whether I have taken the trouble to get acquainted 
with, or try to understand, contemporary poets. But 


The Allied Arts Again 

I can plead guilty only in part — I have not been able 
to keep pace with all our American poets, it is trae, but 
I have known some of them, and I am eager to meet 
others and try to understand their art. 

Instead of citing Carpenter's settings of the Tagore 
things in your editorial, you might more fitly have men- 
tioned his use of The Hearths Country ^ by Florence Wilkin- 
son; or the delightful song Henry Hadley made last 
year out of When I Go Away from You^ by Amy Lowell. 

Please let me say in conclusion that I never have said 
there were not fine American songs. But they are 
remarkably few, and remarkably hard to place effectively 
in a recital programme. Charles Albert Case 

Northampton^ Mass. 

II 

Dear Poetry: To all serious students of the dance, the 
first sentence in your October article, "Poetry would like 
to celebrate its ninth birthday by inaugurating a closer 
affiliation with the allied arts of music and the drama — 
perhaps also the dante^* is encouraging. That "perhaps" 
is deserved: only those who come in daily contact with 
the too-popular belief that the door to real achievement 
may be kicked open by a perfectly pointed toe, can 
realize how far the dance has traveled from its dignified 
origin. In alliance with that music and poetry to which 
the dance really gave birth lies her only hope. Music 
and poetry give the dancer a reason for existence. 

We had the pleasure of working with Alfred Kreymborg 
in the summer of 1920, and not only felt that we, as 
dancers, had profited, but we gained an insight into, and 
a feeling for, the rhythm of modern poetry that nothing 
but the actual bodily expression of it could have given us. 
We have been fortunate also in being associated with a 
musician who has used pieces of Sara Teasdale's, Vachel 
Lindsay's, Bliss Carman's, and other moderns, as themes 
for dance-music. 

Certainly poets, musicians and dancers need not fear 
to join forces. They have the fundamentals in common. 
With such different, yet harmonious, outward manifesta- 
tions of those fundamentals, surely the result will not be 
unworthy of poetry or music, and will surely be of infinite 
value to the dance in its reinstatement among the arts. 

We so often fail to say the pleasant things we think. 
Poetry is a monthly refreshment. It is like a breath 
from freshly opened flowers, or a drink of mountain water. 

Bertha Wardell 

Los Angeles^ Cal. 

Note by the Editor: Another correspondent reminds us that Rupert 
Hughes, well known both as novelist and composer, has used a number 
of modem lyrics: for example, one of the editor's own, / Love my Ufe^ 
originally published in Poetry; and quite recently Evening in the West^ 
or better The Ivory Moment^ by John Drury, from the new Los Angeles 
monthly. The Lyric West, Schirmer & Co. are Mr. Hughes' publishers. 




NOTES 

Mr. Lew Sarett, of Chicago, or rather of her neighbor-city Evanston, 
has consented to act henceforth as a member of the Advisory Committee 
of Poetry. Mr. Sarett is the author of Many Many Moons; and the 
award of last month to his poem. The Box of God^ makes him the latest 
winner of the Helen Haire Levinson Prize. He has been, for the last 
year, in the Public Speaking Department of Northwestern University. 

In our advertising pages the Poetry Society of South Carolina makes 
an announcement of great interest to poets. A prize of I250, donated 
by W. Van R. Whitall, Esq., of Pelham, N. Y., is to be awarded an- 
nually, under the Society's auspices, for the best poem sent in competi- 
tion before Jan. ist of each year. Mr. Pelham makes sure of a com- 
petent choice this year by appointing Miss Amy Lowell to the honor 
of initiating the award by acting as the first judge. 

Louise Ayres Gamett (Mrs. Eugene H.), of Evanston, 111., wrote 
the poem Resurgam as the text of an oratorio for which Mr. Henry Had- 
ley is now composing the music. In our November Correspondence 
Mrs. Gamett told the story of this collaboration; and the complete work, 
which will soon be published, may be regarded as an essay in that 
closer alliance between poetry and music which the editor has pleaded 
for in recent numbers of Poetry. 

Mrs. Gamett has published, through Rand, McNally & Co., three 
books of verse for children; and she wrote both words and music of 
Creature Songs (Oliver Ditson Co.). The Macmillan Co. published 
her play Master fFill of Stratford^ and The Drama has printed two or 
three of her plays for children. 

Mr. Walter de la Mare, the well known English poet, is the author 
of numerous books of verse for adults and children; and his Collected 
Poems — igoi'igiS were published in a two-volume edition by Henry 
Holt & Co. in 1920. 

Mr. Fenton Johnson, of Chicago, who stands facile princeps among 
living poets of his race, is the author of three small privately printed 
books of verse, the latest being Songs of the Soil (1916). He foundied, 
and edited for some time The Champion^ a magazine for Negroes, and 
he has been on the staff of The Favorite Magazine, 

Mr. Emanuel Carnevali, of Chicago, has contributed verse and prose 
to most of the special magazines, but has not yet published a volume. 
In 191 8 he recdved a Young Poet's Prize from Pobtry. 

Miss Winifred Waldron, of North Glendale, Cal., has printed poems 
in various magazines. "Paul Tanaquil" is a pseudonym. 

Of the poets who have not hitherto appeared in Poetry: 

Miss Pearl Andelson, of Chicago, was until recently a member of the 
Poetry Club of the University of Chicago, which has been a good training- 
school for a number of young poets. 

Miss Dorothy Dow, of Winchester, lU., has published little as yet. 

Mr. Laurence Vail lives in New York. 

Ditto Mr. Henry Saul 2^1insky, who, although only seventeen, has 
already been newsboy, bell-boy, office-boy, electrician, shoe-salesman 
and ad-solicitor; and who hopes to become a student again some day 
and finish his interrupted course at college. 



BOOKS RECEIVED 

ORIGINAL VBRSB: 

Poems^ by Claude CoUeer Abbott. Basil Blackwell, Oxford, Eng. 
Missing Links awl Other Things^ by Thomas F. McCarthy. Journal 

Publishing Co., Devil's Lake, N. D. 
A Brochure of Verse^ by Ralph S. Woodworth. Privately printed, 

Elkhart, Ind. 
The Infant in the News-sheet: An Ode Against the Age^ by Herman 

George Scheffauer. Overseas Pub. Co., Hamburg, Germany. 
Pagan Looe Lyrics^ by Alfred Bryan. Privately printed. 
Little FisitSy by Raymond E. Manchester. F. W. Orth Co., Cuyahoga 

FaUs, O. 
Memorial Poems^ by Henry Polk Lowenstein. Privately printed, 

Kansas City. 
Every Day Poems^ by George Elliston. Stewart Kidd Co., Cincinnati. 
Golden Mud^ by Glenn M. Coleman. Privately printed, Mt. Vernon, la. 
Scattered Leaves^ (3rd ed.), by Edward C. Wentworth. The Book- 

fellows, Chicago. 
Shadows^ by Susan Baker. Privately printed, Chicago. 

(Other books received will be listed next month.) 




MAKE CHRISTMAS 

Last Through the Whole Year 



What more interesting as a gift than a subscription 
to Poetry, to reach your friend, not once, but every 
single month for a twelvemonth! 

A beautiful poem is the most lasting gift we can think of. 

Your friend will delight with us in discovering new 
poets and new poems. 



POETRY, 
543 Cass St., Chicago, 111. 

Please send POETRY for one year, beginning with the December, 
1921, number, to: 

NAME 

ADDRESS 

NAME 

ADDRESS 

For each subscription I enclose I3.00 (or, for Canada, I3.15; foreign, 
13*25) ; I understand that the December number of POETRY and 
a card announcing the gift as from me will be sent. 

NAME 

ADDRESS 



 



MISS HARRIET MONROE 

who has studied the poetry movement 
in all its phases, will consider engage- 
ments for a lecture trip east, west or 
south in February and March, 1922; or 
for autxunn and winter dates nearer 
Chicago. 

For termst dates and other details 
please address 

POETRY 

543 Cass Street, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 



STATEMENT OF THE OWNERSHIP. MANA0EMENT, CIRCULATION. ETC.. 
REQUIRED BY THE ACT OF CONGRESS OF AUOUST 24. ISI2. 

Of FMtry. imblUbed monthly at Chloaco. ni.. for October 1. 1921. 

State of nUnole. Countj of CoOk. Before me, a notaiy mibUe in and for tbe 
State and county aforeeald, peraonally ai>peared Harriet Monroe, who. having been 
duly iwom accordlni to law. depoees and eaya that she 1« the editor of Poetry, and 
that the following la. to the beet of her knowledge and belief, a true itatement of the 
ownenhlp, management, etc.. of the aforeeald publleatloa for the date ahown In the 
above eapUon. Te<iulred fay the Act of Auguet 24, 1012, embodied in aeoUoa 448. 
Foetal Lawe and BegulaUona. minted on tbe reveree of thle form, to-wlt: 

That the name and addreet of the xmbliiber. editor, managing editor Is Harriet 
Monroe: buslneee manager, Mlla Straub. 548 Caie itreet; owner. Harriet Monroe. 

That there are no bondholdert. mortgagees and other eecurlty holders. 

That the two Daragraphs next above, giving the namee of the owners, etookholdeit. 
and eeeurlty holders. If any. oonUln not only the Ust of stookholders and security 
holders as they appear upon the books of the company but also. In cases where the 
stockholder or eeeurlty holder appears upon the books of ths eompany as trustee or In 
any other fiduciary relation, the name of the person or corporation for whom sutih 
trustee Is acting. Is given; also that the two said paragraphs contain statemenu em> 
bracing affiant's full knowledge and belief as to the elreumstanoes and conditions 
under which stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of 
the company as trustees hold stock and securltlee in a eapadty other than that of a 
bona fide owner: and this affiant has no reason to believe that any other person, 
association, or corporation has any Interest direct or indirect in the said stock, bonds. • 
or other securities than as so sUtsd by her. 

HABRIET MONBOE (Ownsr). 

Bwom to and subscribed before me this 24th day of September, 1921. 

W. C. BBTAN. 
(My commission expires August 24. 1M5.) 



 



A NEW ANNUAL PRIZE 

The Poetry Society of South Carolina announces 

THE BLINDMAN PRIZE 

A cash prize of Tufo Hundred and Fifty 

Dollars, presented for annual award by 

W. van R. WHITALL, Esq. 

The competition for this prize is open to any native-born citizen 
of the United States, or any British subject speaking English as 
his or her native language. Poems submitted must not have been 
previously printed, and the Society reserves the right to publish 
the prize poem and those honorably mentioned. 

All poems entered in this competition must be in the hands 
of the Secretary of the Society not later than January 1, 1922. 
Miss Amy Lowell has consented to act as judge m the first year's 
conipetition. 

Further information will be furnished upon request by DuBose 
Heyward, Secretary of the P.S.S.C, 76 Gnurch St., Charleston, 
S.C. 



SPECIAL OFFER TO SUBSCRIBERS 
POETRY IS NOW $3.00 a year 

But for an Even FOUR DOLLARS 

sent for a new subscription, or a renewal, you may have 

POETRY for one year (prcc ^3.00), and 
THE NEW POETRY — An Antholooy 

(MacmiUan Co. — ^2.50 postpaid), a representative col- 
lection of contemporary verse edited by the editors o\ 
this magazine. The best modem anthology. 



 



HYMEN— by H.D, 

The first American edition of verse 
by H. D., **the most perfect of the 
Imagists/' 

Amy Lowell says : " H . D . , although the least prolific, 
is one of the most important poets of the present poetic 
renaissance. Hymens her new volume, shows ail her 
old excellencies, with a greater depth and poignancy of 
human emotion. It is a book for all poets and lovers 
of poetry." 

Hymen is truly Greek in its austere beauty and per- 
fection of form. 

Price 11.75 
HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY - NEW YORK 



A HEALTH FACTOR 
IN MANY HOMES 

"Horlick's" 

the Original 

Malted MUk 

Delicious and inviirorating food-drink that improves 
the nutrition of ul ages. 

Serve at meals and to refresh whenever fatigued or 
hungry during the day. Ayoid imitationt at the foimUui. 

KNOWN RT ITS RECORD OF OVER V& OF A CENTURY 



 



Vol. XIX 



DEC 39 1921 



No. IV 




A Magazine of Verse 
Edited by Harriet Monroe 

January 1922 



The Witch of Coos 
by Robert Frost 

Four Poems by 

Wm. Carlos William^ 

Marjorie Meeker 

Glenn Ward Dresbach 



543 Cass Street Chicago 

$3.00 per Year Sintfle Numbers 25c 



 



DEC 29 1921 

iff. Pcfd Mado* Huig^\4kedvdineuishfd ^ffiisk Poei, tumdist and critic, wroU 
us lost Julyi ^^frnk^MS^S^^^^^^ 

If American periodical litmturnastoday a little peak, a little group of 
Jouroala, raising it to the level of the best of European cosmopolitanism, or at any 
rate in that direction, it is because you and your small paper showed how, editor- 
ially and economically, it could be done. 

Vol. XIX No. IV 

POETRY for JANUARY, 1922 

PAOB 

The Witch of CoOs Robert Frost 175 

Songs of Night Marjorie Meeker 182 

Ode to Myself Trying to Sleep — In Darkness — By a Window 

— Song for a May Night — Qo\ot of Water — Lonely Sky and 

Sea — G)mrade8 

First Snow Esther Louise Ruble 186 

Songs of the Plains Glenn Ward Dresbach 187 

Two Poems Grace Fallow Norton 190 

I Shall Remember— Shy Perfect Flower 

To Sappho Julia R, Reynolds 191 

Irish Song Helen Coale Crew 19a 

On the Wing Dorothy Keeley 193 

'Four Poems Ernest Walsh 194 

I Ask for a Friend — Sonnet — ^The Fickle Lover — G)llapse 
Tableaux Ellen Margaret Janson 196 

Scherzo— Tryst — Incense Smoke — ^Night in the City — ^Thc 

Unknown 
Poems William Carlos Williams 200 

Wild Orchard— The Lonely Street- Spout*— The Widow's 

Lament in Springtime 

The Hope of Peace H.M. 004 

Must Art Be Interesting? Baker BrowneU 206 

Reviews: 

A Symposium on Marianne Moore H.M, 208 

A Mystic Warrior Dorothy Dudley 216 

Mrs. Wylie's Poems H,M. 220 

Thoughtful Measures /f. A/. 222 

Our Contemporaries: 

New Ititernational Magazines 224 

Various Prizes 227 

Correspondence: 

A Letter from Paris 228 

Notes and Books Received 232, 233 

Manuacriptfl must be accompanied by a stamped and self-addrMsed envelope. 

Inclusive yearly subscription rates. In the United States, Mesdco, Cuba and 
American possessions, $3.00 net; in Canada. $3.15 net; in all other countries in the 
Ftostal Union. $3.25 net. Entered as second-dass matter Nov. 15. 1912, at the 
postoffice. at Chicago, in., under Act of March 3, 1879. 

Published monthly at 543 Cass St., Chicago, 111. 

CoprightJP2J,byBarri€iMonroe. AU rights reserud. 



 



Poetry asks its friends to become 
Supporting Subscribers by paying 
ten dollars a year to its Fund. The 
art of poetry requires y if it is to 
advance, not only special sympathy 
from a discriminating public, but 
also endowment similar to that 
readily granted to the other arts. 
All who believe in the general pur- 
pose and policy of this magazine, 
and recognize the need and value 
of such an organ of the art, are in- 
vited to assist thus in maintaining 
it. 



 



A Magazine of \^e 



JANUARY 1922 



THE WITCH OF COOS 

Circa ig22 

I STAID the night for shelter at a farm 
Behind the mountain, with a mother and son, 
Two old-believers. They did all the talking. 

The Mother 
Folks think a witch who has familiar spirits 
She could call up to pass a winter evening. 
But wotCt^ should be burned at the stake or something. 
Summoning spirits isn't "Button, button. 
Who's got the button," you're to understand. 

The Son 
Mother can make a common table rear 
And kick with two legs like an army mule. 

The Mother 
And when I've done it, what good have I done? 
Rather than tip a table for you, let me 
Tell you what Ralle the Sioux Control once told me. 
He said the dead had souls, but when I asked him 
How that could be — I thought the dead were souls. 
He broke my trance. Don't that make you suspicious 
That there's something the dead are keeping back? 
Yes, there's something the dead are keeping back. 

The Son 
You wouldn't want to tell him what we have 
Up attic, mother? 

The Mother 

Bones — a skeleton. 

The Son 
But the headboard of mother's bed is pushed 
Against the attic door: the door is nailed. 
It's harmless. Mother hears it in the night 
Halting perplexed behind the barrier 
Of door and headboard. Where it wants to get 
Is back into the cellar where it came from. 

The Mother 
We'll never let them, will we, son? We'll never! 

The Son 
It left the cellar forty years ago 
And carried itself like a pile of dishes 
Up one flight from the cellar to the kitchen. 
Another from the kitchen to the bedroom, 


Robert Frost 

Another from the bedroom to the attic, 

Right past both father and mother, and neither stopped 

it. 
Father had gone upstairs; mother was downstairs. 
I was a baby: I don't know where I was. 
The Mother 
The only fault my husband found with me — 
I went to sleep before I went to bed, 
Especially in winter when the bed 
Might just as well be ice and the clothes snow. 
The night the bones came up the cellar-stairs 
Toffile had gone to bed alone and left me. 
But left an open door to cool the room off 
So as to sort of turn me out of it. 
I was just coming to myself enough 
To wonder where the cold was coming from. 
When I heard Toffile upstairs in the bedroom 
And thought I heard him downstairs in the cellar. 
The board we had laid down to walk dry-shod on 
When there was water in the cellar in spring 
Struck the hard cellar bottom. And then someone 
Began the stairs, two footsteps for each step. 
The way a man with one leg and a crutch. 
Or little child, comes up. It wasn't Toffile: 
It wasn't anyone who could be there. 
The bulkhead double-doors were double-locked 
And swollen tight and buried under snow. 
The cellar windows were banked up with sawdust 

U77^ 




 

And swollen tight and buried under snow. 

It was the bones. I knew them — and good reason. 

My first impulse was to get to the knob 

And hold the door. But the bones didn't try 

The door; they halted helpless on the landing, 

Waiting for things to happen in their favor. 

The faintest restless rustling ran all through them. 

I never could have done the thing I did 

If the wish hadn't been too strong in me 

To see how they were mounted for this walk. 

I had a vision of them put together 

Not like a man, but like a chandelier. 

So suddenly I flung the door wide on him. 

A moment he stood balancing with emotion, 

And all but lost himself. (A tongue of fire 

Flashed out and licked along his upper teeth. 

Smoke rolled inside the sockets of his eyes.) 

Then he came at me with one hand outstretched. 

The way he did in life once; but this time 

I struck the hand off brittle on the floor. 

And fell back from him on the floor myself. 

The finger-pieces slid in all directions. 

(Where did I see one of those pieces lately? 

Hand me ray button-box — it must be there.) 

I sat up on the floor and shouted, "Toflile, 
It's coming up to you." It had its choice 
Of the door to the cellar or the hall. 


Robert Frost 

It took the hall door for the novelty, 

And set off briskly for so slow a thing, 

Still going every which way in the joints, though. 

So that it looked like lightning or a scribble. 

From the slap I had just now given its hand. 

I listened till it almost climbed the stairs 

From the hall to the only finished bedroom, 

Before I .got up to do anything; 

Then ran and shouted, "Shut the bedroom door, 

Toffile, for my sake!" "Company," he said, 

"Don't make me get up; I'm too warm in bed." 

So lying forward weakly on the handrail 

I pushed myself upstairs, and in the light 

(The kitchen had been dark) I had to own 

I could see nothing. "Toffile, I don't see it. 

It's with us in the room, though. It's the bones." 

" What bones ? " " The cellar bones — out of the grave." 

That made him throw his bare legs out of bed 

And sit up by me and take hold of me. 

I wanted to put out the light and see 

If I could see it, or else mow the room. 

With our arms at the level of our knees. 

And bring the chalk-pile down. "I'll tell you what — 

It's looking for another door to try. 

The uncommonly deep snow has made him think 

Of his old song. The Wild Colonial Boy, 

He always used to sing along the tote-road. 


 



 J 



POETRY: A Magazine of Verse 

He's after an open door to get out-doors. 
Let's trap him with an open door up attic." 
Toffile agreed to that, and sure enough, 
Almost the moment he was given an opening, 
The steps began to climb the attic stairs. 
I heard them. Toffile didn't seem to hear them. 
"Quick!" I slammed to the door and held the knob. 
"Toffile, get nails." I made him nail the door shut. 
And push the headboard of the bed against it. 

Then we asked was there anything 

Up attic that we'd ever want again. 

The attic was less to us than the cellar. 

If the bones liked the attic, let them like it. 

Let them stay in the attic. When they sometimes 

Come down the stairs at night and stand perplexed 

Behind the door and headboard of the bed. 

Brushing their chalky skull with chalky fingers. 

With sounds like the dry rattling of ^ shutter. 

That's what I sit up in the dark to say — 

To no one any more since Toffile died. 

Let them stay in the attic since they went there. 

I promised Toffile to be cruel to them 

For helping them be cruel once to him. 

The Son 
We think they had a grave down in the cellar. 

The Mother 
We know they had a grave down in the cellar. 

[i8o] 



 



Robert Frost 

The Son 

We never could find out whose bones they were. 
The Mother 

Yes, we could too, son. Tell the truth for once. 

They were a man's his fa,ther killed for me. 

I mean a man he killed instead of me. 

The least I could do was help dig their grave. 

We were about it one night in the ce'lar. 

Son knows the story: but 'twas not for him 

To tell the truth, suppose the time had come. 

Son looks surprised to see me end a lie 

We'd kept up all these years between ourselves 

So as to have it ready for outsiders. 

But tonight I don't care enough to lie — 

I don't remember why I ever cared. 

Toffile, if he were here, I don't believe 

Could tell you why he ever cared himself. . . . 

She hadn't found the finger-bone she wanted 
Among the buttons poured out in her lap. 

I verified the name next morning: Toffile. 
The rural letter-box said Toffile Barre. 

Robert Frost 



[i8i] 




 
SONGS OF NIGHT 

ODE TO MYSELF TRYING TO SLEEP 

Draw in the threads of thought — 

Each delicate filament^ 

Reaching into too many places, 

Finding forgotten faces . . . 

Draw in the long twisting thoughts you have sent. 

Strange, that you lie here wondering 

About things that don't matter; 

Strange, that you lie here pondering . . . 

And outside, the raindrops patter, 

A fog is on the town, 

And over the river 

The drenched lights cross and quiver. 

And the far harsh rumble of trams goes up and down. 

Once, like a wind, beauty swept through you; 

Once, like a small song that sings and sings. 

Happiness crept through you; 

Once, love seemed the reason for things; 

And once you thought 

Peace had come upon you . . . 

And then all came to naught. 

Draw in the threads of thought — 
Each delicate filament, 


Marjorie Meeker 

Quivering and bright; 

Draw in the long twisting thoughts you have sent. 

Cast all the tangled old dreaming and groping 

To the still, deep, 

Strange heart of Night 

(Gentle forever to all grieving and hoping) — 

And sleep. 

IN DARKNESS 

Deep in the heart of darkness I am lying, 

Alone and still; 
And all the winds of darkness and of silence 

Work their will. 

Blowing about me through the awful spaces 

Of night and death; 
Nor all immensity can touch or thrill me 

To thought or breath. 

Deep in the heart of darkness I am dreaming, 

Quiet, alone. 
Careless alike of tender words or cruel — 

Even your own. 

BY A WINDOW 

The owl and the bat 
Are alone in the night — 

What arc they at 

By the dead moon's light? 
Hush! How the wings of the black bat whir! 
(Oh hush, for the sleepers moan and stir!) 

The moon is bleak, 

Like a monk in a cowl . . • 
What do they seek. 

The bat and the owl? 
What danger brews in the night, what sin? 
(But hush, for the sleepers dream within.) 



SONG FOR A MAY NIGHT 

Heigho! 

Many mysterious things I know! 

I know why the moon is like a moth — 

Do you? 
I know why stars are many, and suns 

Are few. 
I know a place where a star fell down. 
And made a hole in the middle of town. 
And all the people jumped in. And so — 

Heigho! 

Other mysterious things I know! 


Marjorie Meeker 



COLOR OF WATER 



You will be the color of water; 

Your voice will be like the wind; 
You will go where the dust goes; 

None will know you have sinned. 

None will know you are quiet, 
Or fluent, or bound, or free; 

None will care you are nothing; 
You will be nothing to me. 

Except a scarlet remembrance . . . 

As if, in a dream of pride, 
A poppy had flaunted her petals 

One day to the sun, and died. 



LONELY SKY AND SEA 

O lonely, lonely sky and sea — 

Where time is a wind that plays between. 
Blowing the colored centuries by. 

Tiny tragedies, quaint and mean — 

Why are you waiting? What have you heard? 

What majestic thing have you known. 
That you watch each other, listening. 

So long, so long alone? 

COMRADES 

Time sweq>s through me like a wind; 

Space engulfs me like a sea. 
Time and Space are at me always — 

They will not let me be. 

I am weary, weary with years, 

Troubled by immensity. 
With eternities around me. 

How can I be free? 



Marjorie Meeker 



FIRST SNOW 



The night was hiding a secret 

When it stole 

Through the red gates of sunset, 

Coming so silently. 

We heard it whispering 

To the bare trees. 

And while we wondered, 

The white souls of the autumn leaves 

Came softly back. 

Drifting, drifting. 

Esther Louise Ruble 



[i86] 



 



SONGS OF THE PLAINS 



There's no hiding here in the glare of the desert- 
If your coat is sham the sun shines through. 

Here with the lonely things and the silence 
There is no crowd for saving you. 

When hearts love here the love lasts longer, 
And hate leaves here a heavy scar. 

But we, with the desert's beauty of distance. 
Are always dreaming of places far! 

If you have come to start a kingdom — 
Our eyes have looked on Rome and Tyre! 

But if you come with dreams for baggage, 
Sit with us by the cedar fire! 

II 

The sultry sudden darkness, 

Like some black mantle thrown 
From shoulders of a giant 

On children left alone, 
Falls over us; and, stilled with fear. 
In dark we see, in silence hear! 

Then rain! — a sudden pounding 
Of unformed maddened things, 

Pounding, splashing — stubborn 

As vultures' heavy wings 
That pound the air, too sure to hate, 
In hunger, and move low, and wait! 

I 
III I 

Four old trees stand tall on a hill. 

Wind swirls around them, never still; i 

And their heads together bow and sway ! 

As if in talk of a game they play. j 

Sometimes they laugh and sometimes sigh; 

And there beneath a low gray sky 

I've seen them drop their leaves when thins 

The gold and crimson, as near dawn 

Wise gamblers drop their cards upon 

The table, saying kindly, "Why 

Quarrel with a game that no one wins!" 



IV 

The wood was so old that I thought 

I'd hear it saying its prayers 
In the aisles like cloisters wrought; 

But I came on it, unawares, 
Chuckling — like old men mellow grown — 



Talking of youth on a hill alone 
[i88] 



 



Glenn Ward Dresbach 



The birds love you too. 

Calling, "Sweet, sweet, sweet!' 
In the windy lane 

Where the tree-tops meet. 

But I love you best. 

Since my lips let pass 
No song lest I miss 

Your steps on the grass. 



VI 

ril go where willows quicken 

Their dances in the glow 
Of morning, and the wild brooks 

Make music down below; 
For I am weary seeking 

The things I may not know. 

And I shall feel the silver 

Of willow leaves, and hold 
A drop of water winking 

With rainbows yet unsold. 
What more may all the world find 

Now all its dreams are old! 

Glenn Ward Dresbach 
TWO POEMS 

I SHALL REMEMBER 

Open to me the door of heaven 

For an hour, an hour! 
Let me pace the floor of heaven. 

Let me pluck one .flower! 

Forever and forever heaven 

Will live upon my lips. 
I shall remember. Never heaven 

Shall fail my seeking ships. 

I shall be shod and swathed with heaven— 

Ah, the blue filmy veil — 
Because for an hour I bathed in heaven 

Whose winds hurt and heal. 

I shall remember. Songs of heaven, 

I shall sing them still; 
Like the silver throngs of heaven 

I shall have heaven's will. 

So open to me the door of heaven 

For an hour, an hour! 
Let me breathe the air of heaven. 

Let me pluck one flower! 


Grace Fallow Norton 

SHY PERFECT FLOWER 

Shy perfect pearl-white flower, blooming alone 

In northern woods where snow has sown 

Its myriad seed — ^shy perfect flower, 

Fragrant, alone — 

Your dark leaves cluster close to hide you the more. 

I part them and remember bright poppies on the plain. 

They run in the wind, a ragged gypsy train; 

They fling themselves at the feet of the golden grain — 

When it is slain they too are slain. 

Their life is a cry! Their life is a sudden scarlet stain! 

Their dream-dark seeds have fearful power. 

And you, shy perfect pearl-white flower? 

Grace Fallow Norton 



TO SAPPHO 

Torn fragments of your woven words I read; 
And less their throbbing cry has power to stir 
My passion than to soothe me to strange peace. 
Remembering the long silence fallen on you. 

Julia R. Reynolds 

IRISH SONG 

Where the highway steps along 

(In Donegal, in Donegal!) 

I gave my feet the choice o* way, wherever they would 

roam. 
They might have marched to Londonderry, Belfast, 

Dublin ... 
The foolish, eager feet o' me, they marched straight home! 

The little gown o' blue you wore 

(In Donegal, in Donegal!) 

Cried out to me, Come in! Come in! Your apron it said. 

Stay! 
The tying o* the plaid shawl across the warm heart o' you 
Tied in-along the heart o' me — I couldn't get away. 

I took off my wander-shoes, 

(In Donegal, in Donegal!) 

The highway stepped along alone, until it slipped from 

view. 
I laid aside my dusty dreams, hung up my ragged lifetime. 
And rested feet and heart o' me before the sight o* you ! 

Helen Coale Crew 




ON THE WING 

A wind that blows from the sea^ and smells 

Of spring and fall together. 
Runs racing up the yellow fields 

Into the autumn weather* 

And I run too, for I am young 

And breathless with all living — 
The trees are shouting as we pass. 

The asters singing in the grass. 

In half an hundred years from now. 

When all my songs are sung, 
rU not be old and crossly sage, 
I'll love the bright hill of my age 

Under its winter sun. 
And wave the gayest hand I know 

To everything that's young. 

Dorothy Keeley 


POUR POEMS 

I ASK FOR A FRIBND 

I ask a girly for a friend — a playmate 

Full of May-blown dreams; and lilac in her hair; 

With boyish ankles, intimately strange 

And hands forever busy with applause; 

And mothering, lash-screened, virgin eyes; 

And a slim-breasted body made of joy. 

Her coming would mean spring to my heart; 
We'd give our souls a holiday, cut loose, 
Arrange a rendezvous with Love somewhere — 
And forget to keep it, being good friends. 

I ask a girl, for a friend — a playmate 

Full of May-blown dreams; and lilac in her hair. 

SONNET 

When Love unveiled her body to my sight 
And in my heart a strange unquiet grew, 
As soft winds stir the bosom of the night 
And, after, spill their tears as drops of dew — 
When first Love laid aside her woven dress 
Of silken-tissued dreams and scented stuff, 
And fastened my young eyes with loveliness 
Until I thought one world was scarce enough 
To hold such utter happiness and pain — 


Ernest Walsh 

I begged the god of love to strike me blind, 
And seal Love's image up within my brain, 
Queen of my thoughts the kingdom of my Mind! 
But when I took Love's body to my breast. 
Her lips were bitter, and her face a jest* 

THE FICKLE LOVER 

I have made Life my mistress; built temples 
Of song to her in my heart; paraded 
Before her enemy, Death. And smiling, 
Have kissed Life before Death's envious eyes; 
Proud in my lust, gay in my strength, love-wise. 

But often in my dreams I've wished to touch 
The cool sophisticated lips of Death. 

COLLAPSE 

As an old tree bent by ages of winds. 
So I am tired; 

As an oak-leaf blown out upon the sea, 
I am lonely; 

As a storm-conceived adventurous wave 

Divides before its thousand lonely deaths 

On alien shores. 

My life shall end. 

Ernest Walsh 

[i9Sl 




 
TABLEAUX 

SCHERZO 

My soul is a danccr-r 

A dancer under shimmering willows in the sunlight. 

The wind draws a bow across his violin. 

He plays a scherzo — 

Rippling notes on strings of silver. 

Play faster, wind! 

My feet are more swift than the leaves of the willow- 
Shimmering, shimmering — 
Amber shadows in the sunlight. 
My feet arc more swift than the laughter of waters: 
Play faster, wind! 

TRYST 

I will wear my gown of dusk-blue silk. 

And in my hair 

A crescent moon, curved like a petal. 

From the rim of the shadowy pool 
I will pluck an iris — 
Dusk-blue, shading to purple. 
Faint-scented as the breath of sandalwood. 

Softly 

I will come through the drooping willows. 


Ellen Margaret Janson 

The leaves will catch at my gown. 

Dusk-blue 

In the purple shadows. 

The grasses will whisper, sighing, 

As if they knew. 

Down at the wall 

I will wait alone in the darkness; 

And close my eyes. 

Dreaming that I hear your voice. 

INCENSE SMOKE 

One stick I lit in the bronzen image. 

The smoke curls upward — ^lazily — between his lips; 

Ivory, and the frail blue of shadows. 

The image is speaking — 

Words of lazy dream-blue smoke 

Carved like ivory: 

"Do you remember? — 

The priests wore dragons, great jeweled dragons on their 

robes. 
They sang dreamily 
To the god of the dim temple — 
Chanting, chanting 

Through the twisted smoke of incense. 
But the god did not stir. 
His eyes were like opals, veiled with lost mystery!" 

The smoke curls upward — drowsily — 

Between his lips; 

Mist-gray, and the amber of shadows. 

The image is speaking. 

Words of dim gray-gold smoke 

Graven like amber: 

"Do you remember 

The offering you burned alone at dawn 

To one who did not answer? 

Across the ashes 

You saw the sea-mist rising — rising — 

Like the smoke of incense^ 

And cried out with the pain in your heart." 

The smoke curls upward — dreamily — 

Between his lips; 

Ivory, and the lost blue of shadows. 

NIGHT IN THE CITY 

I hear them pass by the wall of my garden — 

The swift whisper of silk, 

And laughter — 

Tinkling like the wind-bells on the shadowy terrace, 

Tinkling and calling. ^ 

Their lanterns form a necklace 
Of gems, 


Ellen Margaret Janson 

Low-strung across the dusk. 

Their laughter dies away past the wall of my garden. 

In the willow 

The echo lingers — 

The echo of laughter, failing 

Into sudden weariness. 

THE UNKNOWN 

I am the stir of garments that you heard 

Pass by you in the wood. 
I am the lips that smile, but speak no word 

For evil or for good. 

I am the voice that whispered in the long 

Sweet twilights of the spring. 
I am the haunting music of the song 

I would not let you sing. 

I am the finger beckoning in the street; 

The strife, and the reward; 
The quivering joy that stabbed you with its sweet 

Sharper than any sword. 

I am the dream that shines — a light apart, 

When other lights are spent. 
I am the pain that grips and breaks your heart 

To save it from content! 

Ellen Margaret Janson 
POEMS 

WILD ORCHARD 

It is a broken country, 
the rugged land is 
green from end to end; 
the autumn has not come. 

Embanked above the orchard 
the hillside is a wall 
of motionless green trees, 
the grass is green and red. 

Five days the bare sky 
has stood there day and night. 
No bird, no sound. 
Between the trees 

stillness 

and the early morning light. 

The apple trees 

are laden down with fruit. 

Among blue leaves 
the apples green and red 
upon one tree stand out 
most enshrined. 

Still, ripe, heavy, 
spherical and close, 


fVilliam Carlos Williams 



they mark the hillside. 
It is a formal grandeur, 

a stateliness, 
a signal of finality 
and perfect ease. 
Among the savage 

aristocracy of rocks 
one, risen as a tree, 
has turned 
from his repose. 

THE LONELY STREET 

School is over. It is too hot 

to walk at ease. At ease 

in light frocks they walk the streets 

to while the time away. 

They have grown tall. They hold 

pink flames in their right hands. 

In white from head to foot, 

with sidelong, idle look — 

in yellow, floating stuff, 

black sash and stockings — 

touching their avid mouths 

with pink sugar on a stick — 

like a carnation each holds in her hand- 

they mount the lonely street. 

[20l] 




 

SPOUTS 

In this world of 

as fine a pair of breasts 

as ever I saw, 

the fountain in 

Madison Square 

spouts up of water 

a white tree, 

that dies and lives 

as the rocking water 

in the basin 

turns from the stone rim 

back upon the jet 

and rising there 

reflectively drops down again. 

THE widow's lament IN SPRINGTIME 

Sorrow is my own yard 

where the new grass 

flames as it has flamed 

often before, but not 

with the cold fire 

that closes round me this year. 

Thirty-five years 

I lived with my husband. 


fVilliam Carlos WiUiams 

The plum tree is white today 

with masses of flowers. 

Masses of flowers 

load the cherry branches 

and color some bushes 

yellow and some red, 

but the grief in my heart 

is stronger than they, 

for though they were my joy 

formerly, today I notice them 

and turn away forgetting. 

Today my son told me 

that in the meadows, 

at the edge of the heavy woods 

in the distance, he saw 

trees of white flowers. 

I feel that I would like 

to go there 

and fall into those flowers 

and sink into the marsh near them. 

fFilliam Carlos fVilliams 


COMMENT 



THE HOPE OF PEACE 

ALL the movements of the day — all the isms and 
schools and drives — fade into insignificance compared 
with the movement to get rid of war. This movement is 
not out of place in these pages — in fact, it is immediately 
the poet's business. 

I am tempted to repeat now an editorial from Poetry 
for September, 1914. In the first white heat of those 
terrible first battles, I wrote this page on The Poetry of 
War: 

Poets have made more wan than kings, and war wiU not cease until 
they remove its glamour from the imaginations of men. 

What is the fundamental, the essential and psychological cause of 
war? The feeling in men's hearts that it is beautiful. And who have 
created this feeling? Partly, it is true, kings and their ''armies with 
banners'*; but, far more, poets with their war-songs and epics, sculptors 
with thdr statues — the assembled arts which have taken their orders 
from kings, their inspiration from battles. Kings and artists have 
united to give to war its glamour, to transmute into sounds and colors 
and forms of beauty its savagery and horror, to give heroic appeal to 
its unreason, a heroic excuse to its rage and lust. 

All this is of the past. The race is beginning to suspect those old 
ideals, to give valor a wider range than war affords, to seek danger not 
at the cannon's mouth but in less noisy labors and adventures. When 
Nicholas of Russia and William of Germany, in solemn state the other 
day, invoked the blessing of God upon their armies, the emotion that 
went round the world was not the old thrill, but a new sardonic laughter. 

As Cervantes smiled Spain's chivalry away, so some poet of the new 
era may strip the glamour from war. Tobtoi's War and Peace and many 
lesser books are chapters of the new revelation, and modern science. 




The Hope of Peace 

modern invention, have aided the race in its half-conscious efibrt to 
unveil the bitter hideousness of the war-god's visage. But the final 
word has not been said; the feeling that war is beautiful still lingers in 
men's hearts, a feeling founded on world-old savageries — ^love of power, 
of torture, of murder, love of big stakes in a big game. This feeling must 
be destroyed, as it was created, through the imagination. It is work for 
a poet. 

There will be a new poetry of war. 

The time for that poetry is now. It must be written in 
peace, for when war begins there is nothing to do but 
fight. War is no more inevitable between nations than 
between individuals: as duelling was outlawed long ago in 
all civilized states, and its elaborate and long-accepted 
code of honor relegated to the scrap-heap, so shall war be 
outlawed by the assembled nations of the world, and its 
elaborate and long-accepted code of international law 
become a difsty byword of history. War is an absurd 
anachronism in this closely connected talking and trading 
world; and modern science has made it an anachronism 
poisonous and murderous beyond the maddest dreams of 
the darkest devils of hell. It must end if the white race 
is to preserve its numbers, its supremacy, its creative 
energy and power, and the proud fabrics of its civilization. 

We face a war to the death on war, and none can afford 
to be a slacker in it. In this ultimate war the deadliest 
weapon is the germ of thought in human brains. Only 
the poet can spawn that germ, and send it flying forth 
by invisible millions to mature in the minds of men. 
Cervantes wrote Don ^ixote^ and suddenly a rotten 

things long ready for death, was dead. Let some poet — 
or perhaps a number of poets in a number of arts — stab 
with laughter or scorch with tears the rotten hulk of war, 
and suddenly the world will know that war is dead. 

H.M. 

. MUST ART BE INTERESTING? 

Implicitly all interesting things have beauty, and the 
most interested person is no doubt the most esthetic. 
Such a thesis is not hard to support on the ground that 
interest can relate only to things of immediate worth and 
beauty. But to travel from this rather nervous doctrine 
of values to the position that beauty is determined by the 
interest it arouses is another and more complex matter. 
Though Ford Madox Hueffer in his recent Thus to Revisit 
reiterates charmingly, and with convincing disregard for 
the logical responsibilities of his theme, that art must be 
interesting, the shadow of an unsolved problem rather 
obscures the result. He rests his proposition, it is true, 
on human impulse, not on philosophical consideration; 
but the question is not easily confined. In that spec- 
ulative periphery of art where beauty dissolves into 
metaphysics no problem is more persistent. 

As a weapon against the absolutism in art which makes 
no compromise with the public taste the book will be 
effective. It undermines this stern and puritan dogma 
with the suggestion that final values in art as well as in 
other fields of human experience lie after all. in human 


Must Art be Interesting? 

nature itself. It abandons the rigorous heaven reserved 
by the absolutists for the saved few, and returns frankly 
to popular interest for its standard. To their ascetic 
practice in casting oflF mundane and popular interests it 
can oppose the Protagorean formula, "Man is the measure 
of all things." But in liberating art from these mbralisms 
Mr. Huefier imposes another moralism in his repeated 
dictum, "Art must be interesting." Why after all must 
these highly complex things, art and interest, always be 
associated? That interesting things, as a matter of 
descriptive fact, are in a measure beautiful does not imply 
that art, as a matter of moral or artistic imperative, must 
be interesting. Mr. HueflFer rather increases than dimin- 
ishes the speculative difficulties and enticements of the 
problem. 

Overburdened beauty carries many theories on its back. 
All of them, from absolutist to pragmatist, aim in some 
way to find a functional value of beauty in the social 
system. The mere act of erecting a rational theory about 
it indicates an effort to organize beauty into a system of 
human relationships. There remains to remark, no doubt, 
that beauty is not a theory, that it is not subject to 
theorizing, that it needs and possesses no justification in 
the social order. But that too in its way is incorrect. In 
this field -rich with questions Mr. HuefFer's interesting 
book quite appropriately asks what it cannot answer. 

Baker Brownell 
REVIEWS 

A SYMPOSIUM ON MARIANNE MOORE 

PoemSy by Marianne Moore. Egoist Press, London. 

Such contrary opinions of this provocative little pam- 
phlet have reached us that perhaps the most suggestive 
review will be a more or less questioning rehearsal of 
them. Miss Moore's steely and recondite art has long 
been a rallying-point for the radicals. Although her first 
appearance was in Poetry — in May, 191 5, most of the 
entries in these twenty-four closely printed pages date 
from Others and The Egoist^ a few from The Dial and 
Contact. Rumor has hinted that the selection and publica- 
tion were made by certain friends of the author without 
her knowledge. 

If one were to accept the challenge of the title, and of 
the geometrical verse-designs which frame these cryptic 
observations, one might be led straight to the ancient and 
rather futile inquiry. What is poetry? Poetry is evidently 
a matter of individual definition. H. D., surely a critic 
of authority, calls Miss Moore a poet, and a number of 
young radicals are eager to pronounce her "a very great 
poet," as Yvor Winters did in a recent letter. "With the 
exception of Wallace Stevens," he wrote, "she is about 
the only person since Rimbaud who has had any very 
profound or intricate knowledge and command of sound; 
and I am not sure but I think her about the best poet in 
this country except for Mr. Stevens." 


A Symposium on Matianne Moore 

A more moderate admirer, Miss Winifred Bryher, sends 
us the following estimate from England: 

This volume is the study of a Marco Polo detained at home. It is 
the fretting of a wish against wish until the self b drawn, not into a 
world of air and adventure, but into a narrower self, patient, dutiful and 
precise. Those Various Scalpels is sharper than a diamond. It b as 
brilliant a poem as any written of late years, and yet it is but a play 
with the outside of substances and the inside of thoughts too tired to 
feel emotion. And Dock Rats again, or England^ are wrought as finely as 
the old Egyptians wrought figures from an inch-high piece of emerald; 
but they lack the one experience of life for which life was created. 

The temperament behind the words b not a passive one, however 
much environment may have forced meditation upon it as a form of 
"protective coloration." The spirit is robust, that of a man with facts 
and countries to discover and not that of a woman sewing at tapestries. 
But something has come between the free spirit and its desire — a 
psychological uneasiness that b expressed in these few perfect but static 
studies of a highly evolved intellect. 

Technically it is a triumphant book. There are scenes which are a 
joy to remember; the shifting color of 

wade 

through black jade 

of the crow-blue mussel shells — 

And the vivid beauty of The Talisman: 

Under a splintered mast, 
torn from ship and cast 
near her hull, 

a stumbling shepherd found 
embedded in the ground, 
a sea-gull 

of lapis lazuli, 

a scarab of the sea, 

with wings spread — 

curling its coral feet, 
parting its beak to greet 
men long dead. 

Miss Moore has preferred, to date, to express simply the pictorial 
aspect of the universe, and she has fulfilled perfectly each self-imposed 
task. Her Poems are an important addition to American literature, to 
the entire literature of the modern world. Only, Marco Polo, your 
sword is ready and your kingdoms wait. May it soon please you to 
leave the fireside and ride forth. 

But Miss Moore's admirers don't have it all their own 
way. Here is the point of view of one of Poetry's 
associate editors, Marion Strobel: 

Even a gymnast should have grace. If we find ourselves one of an 
audience in a side-show we prefer to see the well-muscled lady in tights 
stand on her head smilingly, with a certain nonchalance, rather than 
grit her teeth, perspire, and make us conscious of her neck muscles. 
Still, we would rather not see her at all. 

Just so we would rather not follow the contortions of Miss Moore's 
well-developed mind — she makes us so conscious of her knowledge! 
And because we are conscious that she has brains, that she is exceedingly 
well-informed, we are the more irritated that she has not learned to 
write with simplicity. 

The subject-matter of her poems is inevitably dry; the manner of 
expression pedantic. She shouts at our stupidity: "Literature is a 
phase of life;" "Words are constructive when they are true — the opaque 
allusion, the simulated flight upward, accomplishes nothing." And we 
yawn back at Miss Moore's omniscience. 

And another poet-critic, Pearl Andelson, says: 

Marianne Moore has much the Emily Dickinson type of mind, but 
where Emily Dickinson's not infrequent obscurities arise out of an 
authentic mysticism, Marianne Moore's are more likely the result of a 
relentless discipline in the subtler "ologies" and "osophies." She is 
brilliant at times to the point of gaudiness, although one feels that in 


A Symposium on Marianne Moore 

her brilliance she is most herself. As to form, the fact that she wavers 
between prose and poetry is not dis^ised by the breath-taking line- 
formation. Indeed, I should say the incongruous effect was heightened, 
rather than diminished, by occasional rhyming. The same, for the 
most part, may be said of content as of form. Such poems as Picking 
and Choosing and Poetry are hybrids of a flagrantly prose origin. 

Well, let us turn to the book — without prejudice one 
way or the other. In the first place, the lady is delight- 
fully independent; she says in Black Earth: 

Openly, yes, 

with the naturalness 

of the hippopotamus or the alligator 

when it climbs out on the bank to experience the 

sun, I do these 

things which I do, which please 

no one but myself. Now I breathe and now I am sub- 
merged; the blemishes stand up and shout when the object 

in view was a 

renaissance; shall I say 

the contrary? The sediment of the river which 
encrusts my joints makes me very gray, but I am used 

to it, it may 

remain there; do away 

with it and I am myself done away with, for the 
patina of circumstance can but enrich what was 

there to begin 

with. This elephant skin 

which I inhabit, fibred over like the shell of 

the cocoanut, this piece of black glass through which no light 

can filter — cut 

into checkers by rut 

upon rut of unpreventable experience — 

it is a manual for the peanut-tongued and the 

hairy-toed. Black 

but beautiful, my back 

is full of the history of power, Of power? What 
is powerful and what is not? My soul shall never 

be cut into 

by a wooden spear. 

And so on for about forty more lines, which develop and 
elaborate the elephantine symbol, and then drop it, as it 
were, in mid-career, with a quizzical trunk-flourish. As 
Black Earth is admirably representative of its author's 
thought and style, it may serve as the text for a few 
inquiries. 

Meditative self-confession is no novelty in English 
poetry — we have countless examples in as many difl^erent 
patterns. Hamlet's soliloquies, Gray's Elegy y Pope's Essay 
on Many Byron's Childe Harold^ Whitman's Song of 
Myself y many sonnets by Milton, Wordsworth, Keats and 
other supreme sonneteers — these arc but a few of the 
numerous high precedents in English poetry for more or 
less imaginative and more or less metrical meditation. 
And one may not deny imaginative power to the mind 
which can create and round out and energize so effectively 
the grotesque image which appears when she holds up the 
mirror to her soul. Neither may one refuse any poet the 
right to attempt new metrical patterns; since only through 
such attempts does any achievement become possible — 
any enrichment of the English prosodic scheme. 

So it remains to attempt to estimate the validity of 
Miss Moore's processes and the degree of her achievement. 


A Symposium on Marianne Moore 

Unquestionably there is a poet within the hard, deliber- 
ately patterned crust of such soliloquies as Black Earthy 
Those Various Scalpels^ Pedantic Literalisty Reinforce- 
ments — almost any of these titles — though a poet too 
sternly controlled by a stiffly geometrical intellectuality. 
Miss Moore is in terror of her Pegasus; she knows of what 
sentimental excesses that unruly steed is capable, and so 
her ironic mind harnesses down his wings and her iron 
hand holds a stiff rein. This mood yields prose oftener 
than poetry, but it wrings out now and then the reluctant 
beauty of a grotesque, or even, more rarely, such a lyric 
as Talisman. 

No amount of line-patterning can make anything but 
statement and argument out of many of the entries in this 
book — for example. Picking and Choosing^ which begins: 

Literature is a phase of life: if 

one is afraid of it, the situation b irremediable; if 
one approaches it familiarly, 

what one says of it b worthless. Words are constructive 
when they are true; the opaque illusion — the simulated flight 

upward — accomplishes nothing. Why cloud the fact 

that Shaw is self-consciots in the field of sentiment but is otherwise re- 
warding? that James b all that has been 

said of him but b not profound? It is not Hardy 
the dbtingubhed novelist and Hardy the poet, but one man 

"interpreting life through the medium of the 
emotions." 

if the mood instinctively flouts the muse, what of the 
•method? If the mood may rarely yield more than the 

hard reluctant beauty of a grotesque, is the method 
inevitable and right, fitting words musically, magically to 
the motive, as in all the masterpieces of the art? Well, let 
me confess that I do not find the divine shapeliness and 
sound-richness which Mr. Winters referred to in his 
letter. What I do find in certain poems is a brilliant array 
of subtly discordant harmonies not unlike those of certain 
ultra-modern composers, set forth in stanza-forms purely 
empirical even when emphasized by rhyme, forms which 
impose themselves arbitrarily upon word-structure and 
sentence-structure instead of accepting happily the 
limitations of the art's materials, as all art must. When 
Miss Moore uses the first syllable of accident as a whole 
line to rhyme with lack^ or the article ^ as a line to rhyme 
with the end of Persia; when she ends a stanza in a split 
infinitive, or in the middle of the swift word very — indeed, 
anywhere in the middle of words or sentences, she is 
forcing her pattern upon materials which naturally reject 
it, she is giving a wry twist even though her aim is a 
grotesque; and when her aim is more serious, such verbal 
whimsicalities strike at once the iiuensely false note of 
affectation. And as she takes her own way in these 
details of style, so she gives little heed to the more general 
laws of shapeliness; each poem begins as it ends and ends 
as it begins — a coruscating succession of ideas, with little 
curve of growth or climax. 

What I do find throughout this book is wit — wit 
fundamental and instinctive which expresses itself not 


A Symposium on Marianne Moore 

only in words, phrases, rhymes, rhythms, but in ideas, 
emotions. The grim and haughty humor of this lady 
strikes deep, so deep as to absorb her dreams and possess 
her soul. She feels immense incongruities, and the 
incongruity of her little ego among them moves her art 
not to grandeur but to scorn. As a satirist she is at times 
almost sublime — what contrary devil balks her even at 
those moments, tempting her art to its most inscrutable 
perversities? 

Youth is sometimes penetrating in self-diagnosis. I 
am tempted to recall the first poem Miss Moore ever 
published— 7%i2/ Harp You Play So Welly from the 1915 
group ih Poetry: 

O David, if I had 

Your power, I should be glad — 

In harping, with the sling. 

In patient reasoning! 

Blake, Homer, Job, and you, 
Have made old wine-skins new. 

Your energies have wrought 

Stout continents of thought. 

But, David, if the heart 
Be brass, what boots the art 

Of exorcising wrong. 

Of harping to a song? 

The sceptre and the ring 

And every royal thing 

Will fail. Griefs lustiness 
Must cure the harp's distress. 

"If the heart be brass . . • every royal thing will fail." 

It is not this reviewer who says that, or invokes for this 
poet "grief's lustiness." May even grief soften a heart of 
brass? And is a deep resistless humor like Miss Moore's 
the most subtly corrosive destroyer of greatness? 

H.M. 

A MYSTIC WARRIOR 

The Mystic Warrior^ by James Oppenheim. A. A. Knopf. 
We might count as art every cross-country flyer cutting 
its shriek into a black sky or a blue sky; every sky-scraper 
flinging windows, light, smoke into an incredulous sky; 
every unimpeachable bath-room trinity; the giant torsos 
of boilers and bellies of gas-tanks; the bird-ltke or 
fish-like aeroplane; the architecture of the farm — silo, 
granary and barn; or, for the matter of that, the fields of 
grain themselves, the vain prodigal orchards. It is in 
the air to do this. Out of such industrial shapes men are 
making violent tragic-comic drama, ruled as in art by the 
mathematics of the elements. So the analogy is close 
and tempting, and we can point that way to America as 
rich in self-expression. Or we may follow another trend 
of fashion — an import out of French dadaism or a mood 
synchronous with it — and abandon the word art altogether 
as an obsolete and paupered notion. A composer of genius 
was recently heard to bandy the idea of an anti-art 
society, where he said, lightly but seriously, any artist of 
consequence belonged. Ben Hecht in his first work of 
size follows his apparently biographic hero to say it is not 


A Mystic Warrior 

"art" he wants, "art is something he can spit out in 
conversation." In a foreword to an exhibition of his 
photographs Alfred Stieglitz formally junks the word 
along with a number of abstractions. Yet it was a word 
concrete enough to artists, not so long dead either — 
Cfaanne, Degas, Rodin, Whistler — to whom the living 
still pay homage. 

People may be wiped from the face of the earth, but art is. 

And there are still those who echo this as a hard truth, 
in whose eyes even the machine has. been unable to break 
the essential sequence of things. They have need of this 
word to name the one human reality running so close to 
all reality as to far outstrip that vanity, self-expression; 
as to make shapes more intentional, more delicate, more 
potent than any American industry has yet made. In 
the pages of The Mystic JVarriory an analysis of himself, 
James Oppenheim writes himself down as one of these. 
His sense of the relentless absolutes of art, his denial of 
himself as an absolute, instil this poem with a deep 
candor, a kind of darkened tranquillity — virtues rare 
enough today to mean in themselves distinction: 

The artist, finally the artist? 

America shuns him, cutting herself off from her own greatness: 

But lie comes nevertheless ... he is Walt riding on top a bus, and Poe 

dreaming of stars in a cottage with his wife dying, 
And Emerson, absent-minded, minded of the Oversoul, in G)ncord 

woods. 
And Hawthorne moody in sad Puritanism, 


And Mark Twain smoking cigars in bed, sweating and groaning over 

Huckleberry Finn, 
And giant-like tearful Dreiser, and Sandburg sitting in a newspaper 

office. 
And Vachel Lindsay jazzing in Paradise (or is it Springfield, Illinois?) 
And Masters among all souls in strange Spoon River. 

So I speak for the artist ... 

But also I speak for the multitude like myself, with equal struggles and 

the same yearnings. 
The same sorrows, joys and lamenting. 
But no gift: inarticulate, frustrated, America's victims. 

There is the argument, in the unfolding of which per- 
haps Oppenheim does not quite go the length of candor. 
For his indecisions and his failures he can't resist blaming 
America more than the mere fact that the inevitable 
image, word, phrase come seldom to him. You enjoy the 
drift of the book, but you have to ignore more than one 
lapse of taste — that unerring instinct for the word and the 
place. Perhaps too breathless an awe has sometimes 
defeated him. There is a hint of this in the picture of a 
meeting with "our most powerful novelist*' — Theodore 
Dreiser, one is led to suppose: 

So we walk, we talk. 

And here is the Hudson, the North River, with shouting gold of sunset 

and smokes of the tugboats. 
Shadows of cliiFs, like the spacious threshold of a spiritual universe; 
And I grow tense with the wonder of it and feel the artist's despair of 

setting it down in words ... 
So I turn to hihi: " J"st look," I say, "could you describe that?" 
He speaks carelessly: 
"Oh, yes— that or anything." 


A Mystic Warrior 

Yet this reverence for great vision, great craft, has had 
its reward, the reward of concentration — workmanship. If 
this writer were a house-painter, you might not always 
like the colors he mixed, but his surfaces, his finish would 
be scrupulous. So The Mystic Warrior contains pictures, 
— indelible pictures, snatches of rhythm, voices: pictures 
of childhood in NeW York schools and brownstone houses; 
pictures of a death and a funeral: 

I am a tailor: I am cutting and sewing a pair of pants for my little 
brother: 

My little grandmother cgmes in, walks softly, inaudibly by me ... . 
She carefully pulls down the shades, making the room yellow . . . 
I confront her: "Why do you pull down the shades, grandma?" 

She says there is too much sunlight . . . 

Then she looks at me, hesitates, takes me by the arm. 

Whispers in my ears, "James, your father is dead." 

I smell flowers — lilies, roses, violets — I shall never forget that smell . . 
I am taken down in the long parlor . . . 

There are people there: uncles and aunts, grandpa, grandma . . . 
There are camp-stools, and a black-cloth coffin smothered in flowers . . 

And now my infancy is ended . . . 

For this is death; I have come face to face with my enemy, death . . 

Servant-girls soothed me, saying, "He is an angel now." . . . 

Vivid portraits of people; pictures of offices, wharves 
homes; pictures of a Jewish bourgeoisie in New York, 
redolent of the race, recalling the riches Rembrandt made 
of the same theme in Amsterdam centuries ago; and the 
breath of countless streets: 

Old days on the West Side, 

Old nights. 

Summer nights when there was a faint G)ney Island stir down electric- 
lit Eighth Avenue . . . 
A moth-sdr, flame, shadow, Bagdad. 

There is unction in The Mystic Warrior^ but almost no 
sham, no bunk. At its best the tenor of it is curiously 
dark and steady — a suggestion of slow night rkin, or a ship 
at anchor in night waters. The poem succeeds in being a 
distillation, in contrast to the brew made, it seems, after 
the recipe: "To hell with work, novelty will provide the 
kick." Oppenheim, you feel, has earned the right to say: 

In the grey air we walk, in the glister of the dying year; 
And my soul goes down to roots, and the roots, like a tree's, are deep in 
the earth. 

Acknowledging this, you are even willing to ignore the 
abstract use of the word "soul." 'Dorothy Dudley 

MRS. WYLIe's poems 

Nets to Catch the Windy by Elinor Wylie. Harcourt, 

Brace & Co. 

A lyric voice slight, but clear and fine, may be heard in 
this book, the voice of a free and lightly ranging spirit. 
The sound of it is now gay, now grave, but always it holds 
a little aloof — one detects that something "austere, 
immaculate" for which the poet herself holds her Puritan 
ancestry responsible. In a number of poems her mood is 
thoughtfully admonitory, as The Eagle and the Mole^ 
Madman's Songy or Say Not of Beauty she is Good: 


Mrs. Wylie*5 Poems 

Oh, she 18 neither good nor bad, 

But innocent and wild. 
Enshrine her and she dies, who had 

The hard heart of a child. 

Again, it is meditative or descriptive, or, as in Valentine^ 
self-searching. But always the emotion is shy and deli- 
cate, as of a cool small wild-flower growing, by some 
whim of Nature, not in the woods, but in the protected 
area of a garden. The flower is very simple and of quiet 
color, but it has an individual vitality nevertheless. 

The Eagle and the Mole^ urging toward the high or the 
profound as against a safe "middle-of-the-road" policy, is 
perhaps the most temptingly quotable poem in the book. 
But as it has already gone the rounds, and as Poetry has 
printed Vehet Shoes and certain others, we prefer to offer 
The PrinkirC Leddie as an example of pure and irresistible 
gayety — a mood extremely rare in modern art: 

"The Hielan* lassies are a' for spinnin' 
The Lowlan' lassies for prinkin' and pinnin'; 
My daddie w'u'd chide me, an' so w'u'd my minnie 
If I s'u'd bring hame sic a prinkin' leddie." 

Now haud your tongue, ye haverin' coward. 
For whilst I'm young, I'll go flounced an' flowered. 
In lutestring striped like the strings o' a fiddle, 
Wi' gowden girdles aboot my middle. 



My silks are stiff wi' patterns o' siller, 
I've an ermine hood like the hat o' a miller, 
I've chains o' coral like rowan berries, 
An' a cramoisie mantle that cam' frae Paris. 



When the skies are low an' the earth is frozen, 
Ye'U be gay an' gled for the leddie ye've chosen. 
When ower the snow I go prinkin' and prancin' 
In my wee red slippers were made for dtmcin'. 

It's better a leddie like Solomon's lily 
Than one that'll run like a Hielan' gillie 
A-linkin' it ower the leas, my laddie. 
In a raggedy kilt an' a belted plaidie! 

An unusually interesting first book. H. M. 

THOUGHTFUL MEASURES 

Out of Misty by Florence Kilpatrick Mixter. Boni & 

Liveright. 

Carefully studied, delicately wrought, are these poems — 
this sequence of twenty-nine sonnets followed by as many 
other poems. If they are in a sense too studied and de- 
liberate, they yet express genuine emotion in grave and 
thoughtful measures of modern straightness and sim- 
plicity — there is no pretense in the feeling, and rarely a 
trace of rhetoric or palaver in the style. The best of 
them rise to a quiet beauty and distinction — Lullaby^ 
which was in Poetry last summer, is a fine lyric; and this 
one. To a Young Girly is almost as quotable, though the 
word holocaust is a bit melodramatic: 

I had forgotten there were hearts so young 

As yours, tonight, 
Whose voice, now echoing with songs unsung. 

Fills me with strange delight. 

I had forgotten there were eyes so swift 
Of April mirth, 


Thoughtful Measures 

Flashing as though with some invisible gift 
From Heaven t6 Earth. 

I had forgotten there were lips that pray, 

Like a gray-winged dove. 
For one more hour of laughter and of play 

Before the holocaust of love. 

The sonnet sequence hints at the story of a youthful 
love affair finished by autocratic death. We follow it a 
little apart, watching "out of mist," through translucent 
veils, an experience not unusual, not strongly individual- 
ized, but for that very reason of wide appeal. Many a 
first love-story appears here in thoughtiul reminiscence, 
its joy and sadness real, but softened by time and change. 
In sonnet XXVII we have the climax of it: 

In memory I sit beside your bed 

And see again the smile that lit your face; 

Nor do the slow forgetful years erase 

A syllable of those last words we said. 

For, through my tears, seeing your brightness fled 

Because of them, I pled with Heaven for grace 

To make you smile once more, while with quick pace 

I heard night passing that would leave you dead. 

Swiftly I took your hand and held it tight. 

Then told in words that choked me ever after 

Some foolish trifling thing. And though the light 

That came with your brave laugh was gone thereafter, 

Yet, as a rocket fills the quiet night 

With falling stars, I hear again your laughter. 

Cradle Song, Dressing Up, Elegy, and The Candle use 
the familiar four-line measure to present emotions of 
flower-like grace. H. M, 
OUR CONTEMPORARIES 

NEW INTERNATIONAL MAGAZINES 

Three magazines which aim at international authority 
and circulation send us their first numbers from Rome, 
London and New York. All three appear in a luxury of 
format and typography more easily attained abroad than 
here; attainable here, indeed, only at a cost so high as 
to be almost prohibitive. We have, first. The Broom^ 
described as "an international magazine of the arts 
published by Americans in Italy" (at i8 Triniti dei 
Monti), and edited by Harold A. Loeb and Alfred 
Kreymborg, with Giuseppe Prezzolini as associate editor; 
second, Fanfare^ "a musical causerie issued on the first 
and fifteenth of the month," edited by Leigh Henry and 
published by Goodwin & Tabb, Ltd., at 34 Percy Street, 
London; and, third, we have the resuscitated Little 
RevieWy issued as a seven-doUar-a-year "quarterly of arts 
and letters," in an initial autumn number, from 27 West 
Eighth Street, New York, the " administration " consisting 
of Margaret Anderson, "jh," Ezra Pound and Francis 
Picabia. 

In The Broom Alfred Kreymborg shows once more his 
ability as an editor, but the new paper does not "start 
something," nor arouse the excitement of anticipation, to 
the degree that the first number of Others did in July, 191 5. 
There is much variety in the contents, which range from 


New International Magazines 

a strictly correct sonnet by Walter de la Mare to phan- 
tasmagoric designs in black and white and gray from 
paintings in the most approved cubistic manner by 
Albert Gleizes and Juan Gris. 

We see many familiar names among the fifteen or so 
literary contributors: Lew Sarett has a Maple-sugar Song 
of the Chippewas; Amy Lowell offers a three-page chant 
in praise o( Lilacs — 

Your great puffs of flowers 

Are evcrjrwhcre in this my New England. 

Lola Ridge sings of Hospital Nights; Wallace Gould offers 
a prose-poem narrative about Mamia. The only other 
verse-entries are some Chinese poems of J. Wing, trans- 
lated by E. Powys Mathers, and a twelve-line rhymed 
poem, Lake^ by Bayard Boyeson, which opens the number. 
Other poets appear in prose: James Stephens with a 
tragic Dublin story, Hunger, as ruthless and terrible in its 
deliberate detail as the title implies; James Oppenheim 
with a quite wonderful study of a sanely insane mind; 
Haniel Long with a whimsical sketch. Conrad Aiken, 
Louis Untermeyer and Emmy Sanders offer certain 
critical inquiries concerning poets and their art, and the 
invasion of Europe by America. In short, almost every- 
one appears except the over-modest Mr. Kreymborg. 

The magazine has a beautifully printed page about five 
by seven inches, set sumptuously in hand-made large- 
paper measuring nearly nine by thirteen.. 

Fanfare y which is primarily musical, blows a gay trumpet 
as it enters: 

Fartfare — does not the word suggest something stirring, brilliant, 
joyous, exciting — something which preludes adventure? . . . We are 
the heralds of the new era, sounding the fanfare for its union with new 
beauty. Such union calls for revelry; hence our Fartfare will be merry. 
. . . We set forth boldly, our trumpets bright to reflect sunlight, our 
Far^ere ringing truly alike for ritual, ceremony, battle, joust, forlorn 
hope, festival, triumph or masquerade. 

This paper, although a musical periodical, believes, like 
Poetry, in a closer alliance of the arts. Its editor thinks 
that musicians are too narrowly trained — therefore 

Fanfare will deal with literature, drama, painting, sculpture, and theatre- 
craft, as matters a knowledge of which forms a necessary complement to 
musical culture. 

So we have two or three clever drawings and a poem by 
John Gould Fletcher among the musical entries within 
the gaily decorative cover of Fanfare* s first number. 

The Little Review is larger than of yore — an hundred 
and twelve pages measuring more than seven inches by 
nine. It aims at the very latest thing, and achieves, as 
its piece de resistance^ a fifty-page poem by Jean Cocteau, 
translated by Jean Hugo, The Cape of Good Hope. Having 
read half of it, and being still in a state of innocence, I 
commend the rest to those who can watch " the dangerous 
hallucinations continue." 

On the way to Cocteau, we have Ezra Pound on Bran- 
cusi, illustrated; some Fumigations by Picabia, a phi* 

[2^6] 



 



New International Magazines 

losophy of Psycho-democracy set forth by Mina Loy, 
poems in French by Paul Morand and in German by 
Ivan Goll. Also there are some rather outspoken tales, 
and Ezra Pound tells us all of our sins in a Historical 
Survey, 

It is said that Mr. Pound readopted The Little Review 
because of its editor's brave fight against the suppression 
of James Joyce's Ulysses. Well, it was a brave fight — any 
fight against the censor's gag-laden fist takes bravery. 
The trouble is, The Little Review never knows when to 
stop. Just now it seems to be headed straight toward 
Dada; but we could forgive even that if it would drop 
Else von Freytag-Loringhoven on the way. 

VARIOUS PRIZES 

The DiaPs first award of its annual prize of two thousand 
dollars, for one of its contributors, was announced Decem- 
ber first. It goes to Sherwood Anderson, of Chicago, the 
distinguished author of a number of novels and short 
stories, and of Mid-American Chants y poems in free verse, 
of which a group first appeared in Poetry for September, 

This is the most generous literary prize as yet awarded 
in this country; an admirable example which should have 
a train of followers. Although Mr. Anderson's contribu- 
tions to The Dial have been in prose, his being a poet as 
well gives Poetry the opportunity to congratulate him, 

and also the staff of the magazine which honors him. 

The Poetry Society of America announces the award 
of two prizes, each of five hundred dollars: 

First, the prize offered for the best book of verse by 
an American poet, published in the United States during 
the year 1920, is divided equally between Heavens and 
Earthy by Stephen Vincent Ben6t, and Smoke and Steely 
by Carl Sandburg. The judges were Richard Le Gal- 
lienne, William Lyon Phelps and Harriet Monroe. 

Second, the prize offered in the William Lindsey 
Contest for poetic drama has been awarded to Harry 
Lee for his four-act play, // Poverello, One hundred and 
forty-five plays were submitted, and the judges were 
Stuart Walker, George Arliss, George P. Baker, Jane 
Dransfield and Jessie B. Rittenhouse. 

The Friday Club of Chicago, at a recent meeting of its 
board of directors, voted fifty dollar^ to Poetry as a 
prize for a young poet for the current year. 

This gift is acknowledged with special pleasure as it is 
the first offer of the kind which Poetry has received 
from any women's club, or indeed from any society. A 
number of clubs, in Chicago and elsewhere, have given 
annual prizes to painters, sculptors, and perhaps musi- 
cians; we hope that the Friday Club's example will remind 
them that prizes to poets, being excessively rare, should 
have the preference from clubs largely devoted, as most 
of them are, to the study of literature. 


CORRESPONDENCE 



A LETTER FROM PARIS 



My 'Dear Poetry: Interest in American letters seems 
to be increasing in France. As one evidence, note that 
the program required for the English-teaching certificate 
contains Frost's North oj Boston. This is due to M. Charles 
Cestre, the well-known professor of American literature at 
the Sorbonne. I consider it a bold step to admit in 
University studies a quite modern poet whose genius has 
not yet been fully acknowledged by our critics. 

French verse is still a matter of discussion. Yet Paul 
Val6ry seems to attract partisans from sundry corners: 

La lune mince verse line lueur sacr^, 
Toute une jupe d'un tissu d'argent l^er 
Sur les bases de marbre ou vient I'ombre songer. 
Que suit d'un char de perles une gaze nacr^ 

A scintillating symphony of vowels; and a modern render- 
ing of an old romantic theme. Val6ry and a few other 
poets have united to form a "New P16iade." The original 
French P16iade, you remember, was formed at a moment 
when the French language needed clarification and 
enriching. What seems to be the aim of the actual 
P16iade? The names of the members will speak for them- 
selves: Countess Mathieu de Noailles, Pierre Camo, 
Derennes, Gasquet, de Magallon, Mazade, Val6ry — all 
artists of classical or semi-classical verse. It is a protest 
against the extremist and cryptic schools of art. The 

G>untess is a great favorite among women, tender youths, 
priests (if I dare trust a friend's testimony), and bourgeois 
readers in whose ears still lingers the flowing cadence of 
our traditional verse. Camo writes finely-chiselled sonnets 
and odes in which the modern notes blend exquisitely with 
fading reminiscences. Gasquet was a fiery artist of the 
South, whose experiments in polyphonic stanzas, together 
with alexandrines, have just been cut short by death. 
Our poetical tradition has definitely acquired a pliancy 
which not even the attempts at classic tragedy of the 
ofiicial Com6die Fran^aise are able to endanger. Even 
Max Jacob, the sweet child of humor, who keeps apart 
from any coterie with his bons mots and new faith — even 
Max Jacob writes exquisitely modulated alexandrines. 
You see that our extremists, Dada excepted (but who 
knows what they mean? — not even Ezra Pound), display 
a certain coquetry towards our well ordered muse: 

Le ciel a pour la mer des regards qui b^nissent, 
Le soleil sur la mer est un bateau qui glisse, 
Chaque lame a son or, chaque ^ume a sa nuit . • . 

What do you think of this gold-and-black up-to-date 
fabric? — 

Every wave has its gold; every foam has its night. 

More robust and more thoughtful has become the muse 
of Vildrac, and of Romains. The Chants du Desesperiy by 
Charles Vildrac, ring with the sorrow of the poet's bruised 
dreams. Vildrac bends over the corpse of his friend, a 


A Letter from Paris 

victim of the war; he turns his clear eyes on his suffering 
fellow-men; he sees more ugliness than before. 

Jules Remains {Le Voyage des Amants) seems to remain 
more true to his former philosophy. A smiling fancy, 
direct sensations of Paris and the world, with sometimes a 
cosmic vista: 

Lea jours grandissent, 

Chaque jour est un coup plus dur 

Port6 plus profond dans la nuit; 

Et la matiere des t^n^bres 

Tantot moUe, tantot cassante, 

Se pulverise ou s'aplatit. 

The art of the New P16iade and of the Unanimists 
make this a great epoch for French poetry. Alas! that 
it should not also be glorious for the French drama! But 
here we have to deplore that our official theatres leave to 
private and too little moneyed initiative the production 
of new, vigorous and audacious plays. The G>m6die 
Fran^aise practically gave nothing worth mentioning 
apart from the classical r6pertoire. La Mort Enchainee^ 
by Maurice Magre, has won a prize of a few thousand 
francs for the best new play, and it is grievously accurate 
that this heavy and obscure mythological drama was 
merely one of the passable novelties of the Com6die. As 
for the Odfon, we feel sure that the new play by Paul Fort 
is going to make up for the stuff that has been produced 
there in the course of the few past months. But of course 
we have our secondary stages: the Vieux Colombier, 
the Th6ltre des Arts; and we have the Group of the Six. 

I shall have occasion to write you about this young 
group of Six Musicians, and about Jean G>cteau as a poet. 
Let me say now that Les Maries de la Tour Eiffely played 
at the finest and most comfortable theatre in Paris, the 
Champs Elys^es, before a smart audience and a good 
number of buoyantly hostile traditionalists, has not 
proved a failure. It is a farce mimed by dancers for 
actors, while a phonograph explains, in the words of 
Cocteau, the progress of the plot. A nervous cerebral 
music, with here and there patches of sunlight, has been 
composed by the Six. It is a healthy combination of 
sound, color, and gesture; with no human voice, which 
may be deplored, but at least with nothing of the thunder- 
ing declamation of too many comedians. Jean Catel 

NOTES 

Mr. Robert Frost has recently accepted an invitation from the 
University of Michigan; and he is now an informal member of its 
faculty, resident during the college year at Ann Arbor. His latest book 
was Mountain Interval y published by Henry Holt & Co., in 191 6. 
, Dr. William Qu-los Williams, of Rutherford, N. J., will put out very 
soon a new book of poems through the Four Seas Co., which has pre- 
viously published Al ^ue ^uiere and Kora in Hell, Dr. Williams and 
Robert McAlmon are editors of Contact^ a magazine of which four 
numbers have appeared during the past year. 

Miss Grace Fallow Norton, of New York, who is now sojourning in 
France, is the author of The Sister of the fVind and other books of verse 
(Houghton Mifflin Co.). 

Mr. Glenn Ward Dresbach, who has recently removed from New 
Mexico to £1 Paso, Texas, is the author of several bboks of verse, the 
latest being Morning, Noon and Night (Four Seas Co.). A new one. 
In Colors qf the fVest, will appear next spring. 


Notes 



Marjorie Meeker, who recently married Mr. Shirley Wing, lived 
formerly in Columbus, O., but is now travelling abroad. She has not 
yet published a volume. 

The other poets in this number are recent accessions to Poetry's list: 

Helen G>ale Crew (Mrs. Henry Crew), of Evanston, 111., has published 
verse and prose in various magazines. 

Miss Julia R. Reynolds is a young poet of Sumter, S. C; Miss Ellen 
Margaret Janson of Seattle, Wash.; and Miss Dorothy Keeley of 
Chicago. Miss Esther Louise Ruble was brought up in Kansas, and 
is now a student at the University of Chicago. 

Mr. Ernest Walsh, who was in the aviation service during and after 
the War and suffered a fall, is now in the Army Hospital at Camp 
Kearny, Cal., where there is a group of young men who are much 
interested in poetry. 

BOOKS RECEIVED 

ORIGINAL verse: 

The Lifted Cup, by Jessie B. Rittenhouse. Houghton Mifflin Co. 
The Fugitive^ by Rabindranath Tagore. Macmillan Co. 
Red Poppies in the ff^heat, by John Richard Moreland. J. T. White & Co. 
Free Forms, by Simon Felshin. Privately printed, Paris, France. 
John Masterson, by Kenneth Campbell. Campbell Press, San Diego. 
Collected Poems, by Edwin Arlington Robinson. Macmillan Co. 
^ Penny Whistle Together with The Babette Ballads, by Bert Leston 

Taylor. Alfred A. Knopf. 
Archways of Ufe, by Mercedes de Acosta. Moffat, Yard & Co. 
^uiet footers, by Blanche Shoemaker WagstafF. Moffat, Yard & Co. 
Shrines and Shadows, by John Rollin Stuart. Four Seas Co. 
Nets to Catch the Wind, by Elinor Wylie. Harcourt, Brace & Co. 
Cross-currents, by Margaret Widdemer. Harcourt, Brace & Co. 
Saturday Market, by Charlotte Mew. Macmillan Co. 
Faried Verse, by Carter S. Cole, M. D. Moffat, Yard & Co. 
Chenar Leaoes — Poems of Kashmir, by Mrs. Percy Brown. Longmans, 

Green & Co. 
The Pier-glass, by Robert Knopf. Alfred A. Knopf. 



On the Des Moines, by James Cloyd Bowman. G>rnhill G>. 

The Beggar's Vision, by Brookes More. G>mhill G>. 

Pieces rf Eight: A Sequence of Twenty-four PFar-sonnets, by John 
Armstrong Chaloner. Privately printed, Roanoke Rapids, N. C. 

Willow Pollen, by Jeannette Marks. Four Seas G). 

fVe, the Musk Chasers, by Loureine Aber. Ralph Fletcher Seymour. 

England in the Eighteenth Century, by O. F. Christie. Basil Blackwell. 

Melodies and Mountaineers, by Isabella McLennan McMeekm. Strat- 
ford Co. 

The Return and Other Poems, by Margaret L. Woods. John Lane Co. 

The Open Sea, by Edgar Lee Masters. Macmillan Co. 

Reynard the Fox, or The Ghost Heath Run, by John Masefield. Illustrated 
by G. D. Armour and Carton Moorepark. Macmillan Co. 

Bethlehem, by Elizabeth Sewell Hill. Methodist Book Concern, Cin- 
cinnati. 

Dreams Out of Darkness, by Jean Starr Untermeyer. B. W. Huebsch. 

Children of God and fVinged Things, by Anne Moore. Four Seas Co. 

Early and Late, by Katharine Warren. Duffield & Co. 
plays: 

Four Plays for Dancers, by W. B. Yeats. Macmillan Co. 

The Tragedy of Nan, by John Masefield. Macmillan Co. 

Oliver Cromwell, by John Drinkwater. Houghton Mifflin Co. 

One Act Plays, by Alice Brown. Macmillan Co. 

Uriel Acosta — A Play, and A Fourth Group of Verse, by Charles Reznikoff. 
Privately printed, New York. 

ANTHOLOGIES AND TRANSLATIONS: 

Songs of the Cowboys, ed. by N. Howard Thorp. Houghton Mifflin Co. 
Orford Poetry, 1921, edited by Alan Porter, Richard Hughes and Robert 

Graves. Basil Blackwell, Oxford, England. 
fVidsith; Beowulf; Finnsburgh; WMere; Deor: translated by Charles 

Scott Moncrieff; intiod. by Viscount NorthclifFe. £. P. Dutton & Co. 
Selected Poems and Ballads of Paul Fort, translated from the French by 

John Strong Newberry. Duffield & Co. 

prose: 
Louise Imogen Guiney, by Alice Brown. Macmillan Co. 
The Literature of Ecstasy, by Albert Mordell. Boni & Liveright. 


Are You a Connoisseur of Art? 

Keep up with the times— read POETRY 



The New York Sunday Tribune of Jan. Qth, 1921, said editorially, 
in quoting seven poems from our January number: 
'The varied interest and beauty presented are typical of 
Poktry's quality. Thanks to a rare coincidence of poise and gener- 
ous imagination, of sense and sensitiveness, it ranks as easily the best 
vdhide of poetry in the English language." 

In the London Times of Nov. 25th, ig20, we read: 

*^t need not linger over the many English and French con- 
tributors to this periodical. . . We do have to note that it has 
published, as it honestly claims, much of the best experimental 
poetry written by Americans in the past eight years. . . They have 
succeeded in their primary design — ^te create a poetry which should 
be American in thought, feeling, subject, and form. That is, after 
all, a distinct aduevement" 

The Chicago Evening Post, in commenting on POETRY'S eighth 

birthday^ said: 

**So editorship is infallible, but it is rather interesting and 
enlightening to look over the old numbers of Poetry and to realize 
that the first important chance for publication in America was ^ven 
to many poets, almost unknown, wno have since obtained fame. . . 
We wonder how many more may yet be helped. Poetry is, so far 
as we know, unique in the length of its Ufe, recognized position and 
rigorously artistic standard." 



Poetry, 543 Cass street, Chicago 

Enclosed find $3.00 (Canada, $3.15; foreign, $3.35) for one 
year's subscription to Poetry: 

Beginning , • • . • 

Name 

Address • , 



 



A HEALTH FACTOR 
IN MANY HOMES 

"Horlick's'' 

th» Original 

Malted MUk 

Delicious and invifforating food-drink that improves 
ttie nutrition of aU ages. 

Serve at meals and to refresh whenever fatigued or 
hungry durmg the day. Ayoid imitatioDt at the foiiatatD. 

nnm n m ffioxD OF (HB M OF 1 conDn 



MISS HARRIET MONROE 

who has studied the poetry movement 
in all its phases, will consider engage- 
ments for a lecture trip east, west or 
south in February and March, 1922; or 
for autumn and winter dates nearer 
Chicago. 

For terms, dates and other details 
please address 

POETRY 

543 Cms Street, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 



 



,JAN 3CI922 



Vol. XIX 



No. V 




A Magazine of Verse 
Edited by Harriet Monroe 

February 1922 



Poems by Wang Wei, tr'd by 

Witter Bynner and Kiang Kang-hu 

Winter Dawn, by C. L. Skinner 
Fate, by Harold Monro 
Fire, by Eunice Tietjens 



543 Cass Street Chicago 

$3.00 per Year Sintfle Numbers 25c 



 



Mr, Ford Madox Huifftr, Ou distinitUshed En^ish pott, mmdisi and aUic, wnU 
us loji July: 

U American periodical Uterature has today a Uttle peak, a Uttle group of 
joomals, raiting it to the level of the best of European cosmopolitanism, or at any 
rate in that directionp it is because you and your small paper showed how. editor^ 
ially and economically, it could be done. 

Vol. XIX No. V 

POETRY /or FEBRUARY, 1922 

Poems by Wang Wei paob 

. . . . Translated by Witter Bynner and KiangKang-Jm i^S 
Answering Vice-prefect Chang — ^A Message to Fai Tl — 
On the Way to the Temple — Mount Chung-nan — ^A View 
of the Han River — In My Lodge at Wang-Ch'uan — ^My 
Retreat at Chung-nan — ^Among Bamboos — ^Lines — A Parting 
— ^A Song at Wei-ch'eng — ^The Beautiful Hsi-shih — ^Young 
Girls from Lo-yang— Harmonidng a Poem — ^A Green Stream 



An Old Woman — I Complain in Passing . . . Harlow Clarke 247 

Winter Dawn Constance Lindsay Skinner 248 

From a Chicago "L" SaraK-Margaret Brown 251 

Fate I-II Harold Monro 252 

Hillside Poems F.ILMcCreary 255 

Winter Rain — ^A Naked Maple — ^Noontime — ^Judges — ^Alone 
on the Hill 

Incidentals Hi Simons 258 

Dust in the Road— Taps— The Star— Portrait of an Old Roue 

Tak/orSidst Babette Deutsch 259 

In the Office Gwendolen Haste 260 

The Guardians — ^Aileen 

Motherhood Medora C. Addison 261 

The Lover Paul Tanaquil 261 

Fire Eunice Tiet/ens 262 

The Utterance of Poeoy H.M. 266 

Translating Wang Wei Witter Bynner 272 

Reviews: 

A Cool Master Yvor Winters 278 

Mr. Yeats' Plays Cloyd Head 288 

Notes and Books Received . 292.293 

Manuacripta must be accompanied by a stamped and self-addretied envelope. 

Indudve yearly ■nbacriptlon rates. In the United States. Mexico. Cuba and 
American poBtenions, $3.00 net; in Canada. $3.15 net; in all other countxiet in the 
Postal Union. $3.25 net. Entered as second-daas matter Nov. 15, 1912, at the 
post-office, at Chicaco. 111., under Act of March 3. 1879. 

Published monthly at 543 Cast St., Chicago, 111. 
CoPyHght 1922, by Harriei Momoe, AU rigkis resentd. 



 



Poetry asks its friends to become 
Supporting Subscribers by paying 
ten dollars a year to its Fund. The 
art of poetry requires y if it is to 
advance^ not only special sympathy 
from a discriminating public, but 
also endowment similar to that 
readily granted to the other arts. 
All who believe in the general pur- 
pose and policy of this magazine, 
and recognize the need and value 
of such an organ of the art, are in- 
vited to assist thus in maintaining 
it 



 




Boetiy ""»?J 

AMagazine of Verne 



FEBRUARY 1922 



POEMS BY WANG WEI 

ANSWERING VICE-PREFECT CHANG 

AS the years go by, give me but peace, 
Freedom from ten thousand matters. 
I ask myself and always answer, 
What can be better than coming home? 
A wind from the pine-trees blows my sash, 
And my lute is bright with the mountain-moon. 
You ask me about good and evil? . . . 
Hark, on the lake there's a fisherman singing! 

BOUND HOME TO MOUNT SUNG 

The limpid river, past its bushes 
Flowing slowly as my chariot, 

Seems a fellow- voyager 

Returning with the evening-birds. 

A ruined city-wall overtops an old ferry, 

Autumn sunset floods the peaks. . . . 

Far away, beside Mount Sung, 

I shall rest and close my door. 

A MESSAGE TO p'aI TI 

Cold and blue now are the mountains 
From autumn-rain that beat all day. 
By my thatch-door, leaning on my stafi^, 
I listen to cicadas in the evening wind. 
Sunset lingers at the ferry, 
Cooking-smoke floats up from the houses. . . . 
Oh, when shall I pledge Chieh-yu again. 
And sing a wild poem at Five Willows! 

ON THE WAY TO THE TEMPLE 

Not knowing the way to the Temple of Heaped Fragrance, 

I have roamed, under miles of mountain-cloud. 

Old woods without a human track. 

But far on the height I hear a bell, 

A rillet sings over winding rocks. 

The sun is tempered by green pines. . . . 

At twilight, close to an emptying pool, 

I lie and master the Passion-dragon. 


Witter Bynner and Kiang Kang-hu 

MOUNT CHUNG-NAN 

The Great One's height near the City of Heaven 
Joins a thousand mountains to the corner of the sea. 
Clouds, when I look back, close behind me; 
Mists, when I enter them, arc gone. 
A central peak divides the wilds 
And weather into many valleys. . . . 
Needing a place to spend the night, 
I call to a wood-cutter over the river. 

A VIEW OF THE HAN RIVER 

With its three Hsiang branches it reaches Ch'u border 

And with nine streams touches the gateway of Ching: 

This river runs beyond heaven and earth. 

Where the color of mountains both is and is not. 

The dwellings of men seem floating along 

On ripples of the distant sky. . . . 

O Hsiang-yang, how your beautiful days 

Make drunken my old mountain-heart! 

IN MY LODGE AT WANG-CH'uAN 
AFTER A LONG RAIN 

The woods have stored the rain, and slow comes the smoke 
As rice is cooked on faggots and carried to the fields; 
Over the quiet marshland flies a white egret. 
And mango-birds are singing in the full summer trees. 



I 



I have learned to watch in peace the mountain morning- I 

glories, 
To eat split dewy sunflower-seeds under a bough of pine, I 

To yield the place of honor to any boor at all. ... I 

Why should I frighten sea-gulls even with a thought? 

MY RETREAT AT CHUNG-NAN 

My heart in middle age found the Way, 

And I came to dwell at the foot of this mountain. 

When the spirit moves, I wander alone 

Where beauty is known only to me. 

I will walk till the water checks my path. 

Then sit and watch the rising clouds. 

And some day meet an old woodcutter, 

And talk and laugh and never return. 

IN A RETREAT AMONG BAMBOOS 

Alone I am sitting under close bamboos, 
Playing on my lute, singing without words. 
Who can hear me in this thicket? . . . 
Bright and friendly comes the moon. 

LINES 

You who arrive from my old country. 

Tell me what has happened there! 

Did you see, when you passed my silken window. 

The first cold blossom of the plum ? 


Witter By finer and Kiang Kang-hu 



A PARTING 



Friend, I have watched you down the mountain 
Till now in the dark I dose my thatch-door. . . 
Grasses return again green in the spring, 
But, O Wang Sun, will you return? 



A SONG AT WEI-CH ENG 



The morning rain settled the dust in Wei-ch'eng; 
In the yard of the tavern green willows revive. . . 
Oh, wait to empty one more cup! 
West of Yang Gate — no old friends! 



THE BEAUTIFUL HSI-SHIH 

Since beauty is honored all over the empire. 

How. could Hsi-shih remain humbly at home? 

At dawn washing clothes by a lake in Yueh; 

At dusk in the Palace of Wu, a great lady! 

Poor, no rarer than the others — 

Exalted, everyone praising her rareness. 

But above all honors, the honor was hers 

Of blinding with passion an emperor's reason. 

Girls who had once washed silk beside her 

Now were ordered away from her carriage. . . . 

Ask them, in her neighbors' houses. 

If by wrinkling their brows they can copy her beauty. 

A SONG OF YOUNG GIRLS FROM LO-YANG 

There are girls from Lo-yang in that door across the street, 

Some of them fifteen and some a little older. 

While their master rides a rapid horse with jade bit and 

bridle/ 
Their handmaid brings them codfish on a golden plate. 
On the painted pavilions, facing their red towers. 
Cornices are pink and green with peach-bloom and with 

willow; 
Canopies of silk awn their seven-scented chairs; 
Rare fans shade them home, to their nine-flowered cur- 
tains. 
Their lord, with rank and wealth and in the green of life. 
Exceeds, for magnificence, even Chi-lun; 
He favors girls of lowly birth and teaches them to dance. 
And he gives away his coral-trees to almost anyone. 
The wind of dawn just stirs when his nine soft lights go out, 
Those nine soft lights like petals in a flying chain of 

flowers. 
From play to play they have barely time for singing over 

the songs; 
No sooner are they dressed again than incense burns before 

them. 
Those they know in town are only the rich and the lavish, 
And day and night they're visiting the homes of Chao and 

Li. . . . 
Who cares about a girl from Yueh, face jade-white, 
Humble, poor, alone, by the river, washing silk! 


Witter Bynner and Kiang Kang-hu 

HARMONIZING A POEM BY PALACE-ATTENDANT KUO 

High beyond the thick wall a tower shines with sunset, 
Where peach and plum are blooming and willow-cotton 

flies. 
You have heard it in your office, the court-bell of twilight: 
Birds discover perches, officials head for home. 
Your morning-jade will tinkle as you thread the golden 

palace. 
You will bring the word of heaven from the closing gates 

at night. 
And I should serve there with you; but, being full of years, 
I have put aside official robes and am resting from my ills. 

A GREEN STREAM 

I have come on the River of Yellow Flowers, 

Borne by the current of a green stream 

Rounding ten thousand turns through the mountains 

To journey less than a hundred li. 

Rapids hum on scattered stones, 

Light is dim in the close pines. 

The surface of an inlet sways with nut-horns. 

Weeds are lush along the banks. 

Down in my heart I have always been clear 

As this clarity of waters. 

Oh, to remain on a broad flat rock 

And cast my fishing-line forever! 

Translated from the Chinese 
by Witter Bynner and Kiang Kang-hu 

IN PRAISE OF ABRIGADA 

I had been told 

A foolish tale — 

Of stone — dank — cold: 

But you. 

Held to wide winter storm. 

To clutch of blackening frost and ocean gale, 

Are warm! 

I thought that stone was silent too, 

Unmoved by beauty. 

Unaware of season or of mirth: 

But I hear laughter, singing, as I lay 

My face against your gray; 

Surely I hear the ritual of far waves 

And scent their winging spray. 

Mixed with wild-rose and honeysuckle. 

Budding sassafras. 

And the cool breath of pungent, leafy bay. 

I knew that walls were sheltering 

And strong; 

But you have sheltered love so long 

That love is part 

Of your high towering. 

Lifting you higher still. 

As heart lifts heart. . . . 




Hush! 

How the whip-poor-will 

Wails from his bush: 

The thrush 

Grows garrulous with delight! 

There is a rapture in that liquid monotone, 

"Bob White! Boh— fFhiter' 

Dear living stone! 

In the great room below, 

Where arches hold the listening spaces, 

Flames crackle, leap and gleam 

In the deep fire-places; 

Memories dream . . . 

Of other memories, perhaps. 

Of gentle lives. 

Of births, and of those other births that men call death. 

Of voices, foot-steps tapping the stone floor, 

And faces . . . faces . . . 

Beyond, the open door, 

The meadows drowsy with the moon. 

The faint outline of dune. 

The lake, the silver magic in the trees: 

Walls, you are one with these! 



High on the loggia-roof. 
Under the stars as pale as they, 

Two silent ones have crept away, 
Seeking the deeper silence lovers know: 
Into the radiant shadows of the night, 
Into the aching beauty of the night. 
They dare to go! 

The moon 

Is a vast cocoon. 

Spinning her wild, white thread 

Across the sky. 

A thousand crickets croon 

Their sharp-edged lullaby. 

I hear a murmuring of lips on lips: 

"All that I am, beloved! 

All!"— 

Lovers' eternal cry! 

Lift them still higher, wall! 

You stand serene: 

The great winds linger, lean 

Upon your breast; 

The mist 

Lifts up a gray face to be kissed; 

The east and west 

Hang you with banners. 

Flaunt their bold victories of dusk and dawn; 

Seasons salute you as they pass. 

Call to you and are gone. 






Amid your meadow-grass 
Lush, green, 
You stand serene. 



Houses, like hearts, are living, loving, 

Joyful or woeful. 

Forget or are forgot; 

Houses, like tired hearts. 

Sicken at last, and die. 

Crumble and rot: 

But they who know you, Abrigada, 

They — and I — 

Forget you not! 

Nor they who stand on Abrigada's roof, 
Glowing, aloof! 

Come with me now. 

Climb with me, stand, look down 

In new content of mood, 

Withdrawn from clasp of crowd 

And tangle of the town! 

Climb swifter still — 

From safe companionship of doud 

The deeper to look down! 

Not back! 

Forget the thirst, the sordid cup, 

The plethora, the piteous lack; 

Forget the trafficking in tears, 

The arrogance of scars. 

Look up . . . 

To dream undaunted dreams aloud. 

And stumble toward the stars! 

This be in praise 

Of Abrigada; 

In all the ways 

That come to me 

Through the wise^ wistful summer Jays. 

In speechy in rhyme and rhythm of word — 
Call it a poem^ maybe! 

In song — tuck the brown shining wood 

Under my chin! 

Call it my birdy 

My hearty 

My violin! 

In prayer ... 

In dream . . . 

In silenccy best of ally 

Leaning on the beloved dew-drenched wall. 

Leaning and lifting . . . 

High ... 

fVith Abrigada* s gesture toward the sky. 




AN OLD WOMAN 

Something within her makes her live so long — 

It pays no heed that all her friends are dead. 
Her age is moving as a simple song. 

Wailing that happy days long since are dead. 
Something forgets that all her tfceth have dropt, 

That eyes no longer serve to see her ways. 
Time seems not weary of this weed uncropt, 

And draws her on into these newer days. 
She does not know at night if she will rise 

And wake again to live another day. 
Eternity of age now makes her wise — 

A thing on point of passing, hear her say: 

"The moon outlasts my days; the sleepless hounds 
Bark ever in the night — ^strange haunting sounds." 

I COMPLAIN IN PASSING 

I am weary of green in the grass. 

Of green in the trees; 
Of blue in the sky^ of white on the clouds, 

And things like these. 
I pray for one boon down the long white day — 

That I may cease; 
For mountain and meadow and grove and sky 

Leave me no peace. 

Harlow Clarke 

WINTER DAWN 

The dark rolls back. 

Like dropped stars, 

The willows shine on the sides of the water-courses: 

Their ice-blades clash, 

Making a slow thin music. 

So wakes he, Tem-Sotetc-Kwi; 

So comes he slowly — like a slow thin music. 

Ah — ah — hi-i, brothers! Lovers of trails and sea-paths! 

It is the time of sorrow and the time of shutting-in: 

For he has come again — Tem-Sotetc-Kwi — 

With heavy winds, 

Like frozen ropes of cedar, hoary. 

Uncoiling from his thighs 

To bind the world. 

I have seen his white moccasins upon the mountain: 
His steps have hushed the waters 
Of the great and little falls; 
The rushing rivers are stopped. 

He has fed the lake's watery breast to the White Bear 
That follows him. 

The canoes of the Coast-dwellers are hung under the roofs 
Like empty cradles: 

We can no longer rock on the wings of the great Blue 
Heron! 

The great Blue Heron has hidden herself 


Constance Lindsay Skinner 

Under the thatch of her nest, 

Because of his pale gray foxes, with white ears — 

His hungry foxes, 

Huddled about the brink of her nest. 

He has taken away the brown fields, 

Where our bare feet danced with Autumn 

At the feast of berries and maize — 

The bare brown fields that were- glad 

When we drummed with our brown bare feet. 

Singing, "Hoy-mah-ah! hoy a-mah!" 

Ai-hi! The mats his witch- woman weaves for him are 

thick and cold: 
We have put beaver-fur about our feet. 
And made us long, long flat shoes to bear us up. 
(This is our magic, wise men's magic, 
To save us from the White Bear's maw!) 
His great snowy owls fill all our cedars. 
Aii-hi! The red breasts of woodpeckers 
No longer flicker in our forests. 
His witch-woman is plucking the wings of the sky, 
The air is stuflFed with white feathers: 
We no longer may speak with the sun — ai-i ! 
Gravely, with bowed hearts, we greet you, 
O Tem-Sotetc-Kwi, Snow-chief, Ice-hunter, 
Priest of the Long White Moons! 

Slowly, slowly, like thin music. 
Murmur the sorrow-chant, 

Coast-dwellers, my brothers: 

For Tem-Sotetc-Kwi has carved the death totem 

Over Swiya's house-door — 

^'«/jc — se — wag — ila — ^making pure! 

Our mother Swiya, Swiya our mother is dead. 

Sorrow, sorrow, my tribe, for Swiya! 

Much joy had Swiya, our mother, who loved three lovers! 

As a maid, boldly she went forth 

And met Spring among the willows; 

He pierced her with hope. 

Singing she entered the green doors of Summer; 

Singing she came out, girdled with fragrance. 

She took the yellow harvest-moon in her hands, 

And waited in the maize-fields behind our village. 

Autumn clasped her there in the fields; he crowned her 

with maize. 
He filled her pouch with berries, he gave her much deer's 

meat. 

Autumn, Feast-maker! Dearest was he among her three 

lovers — 
He was the strong one: he gave the most food; he was the 

last. 
Ai! great joy had Swiya, our mother, who loved three 

lovers, 
And took their gifts. 
All their gifts were ours: Swiya, our mother, kept nothing 

back. 


Constance Lindsay Skinner 

Now she lies bare, her hands are empty, her face is cold; 
Her eyelids are shut, for her eyes are in the Place of Death, 
Under white eyelids! ^ulx — se-wag-ila! 
Tem-Sotetc-Kwi has carved the death-totem over Swiya's 

door. 
Slowly, softly, like thin music, murmur the sorrow-chant 
For Swiya, our mother. Swiya, our mother, is dead. 

^ulx — se — ^ulX'Se-wag'ila waJ 

Gravely, with bowed hearts, we greet you, 
O Tem-Sotetc-Kwi, Snow-chief, Ice-hunter, 
Priest of the Long White Moons! 

Constance Lindsay Skinner 



FROM A CHICAGO "L" 

The great gray houses walk along 
Sombrely and slow. 

Weary in the dusk. 

In a dragging row. 

They are very tired. 

Heart-broken and old; 
They seem to shudder as they pass. 
The winter wind is cold. 

Sarah-Margaret Brown 

FATE 



I have so often 

Examined all this well-known room 

That I inhabit. 

There is the open window; 

There the locked door, the door I cannot open, 

The only doorway. 

When at the keyhole often, often 
I bend and listen, I can always hear 
A muffled conversation. 

An argument: 

An angry endless argument of people 

Who live behind; 

Now loudly talking. 

Now dimly to their separate conflict moving 

Behind the door. 

There they seem prisoned, 

As I, in this lone room that I inhabit: 

My life; my body. 

You, of the previous being. 

You who once made me and who now discuss me. 

Tell me your verdict, and I will obey it! 

You, long ago, 


Harold Monro 

With doubting hands and eager trembling fingers. 
Prepared my room. 

Before I came, 

Each gave his token for remembrance, brought it, 

And then retired behind the bolted door. 

There is the pot of honey 

One left, and there the jar of vinegar 

On the same table. 

Who poured that water 

Shining beside the flask of yellow wine? 

Who sighed so softly? 

Who brought that living flower to the room ? 
Who groaned, that I can ever hear the echo? 
You do not answer. 

Meanwhile from out the window 

Sounds penetrate of building other houses: 

Men building houses. 

And so it may be 

Some day I'll find some doorway in the wall — 

What shall I take them? 

What shall I take them 

Beyond those doorways, in the other rooms? 

What shall I bring them. 

That they may love me? 

Fatal question! 

For all the jangling voices rise together; 

I seem to hear: 

"What shall he take them?" . . . 

Beyond their closed door there's no final answer. 

They are debating. 

II 

O Fate! Have you no other gift 
Than voices in a muffled room? 
Why do you live behind your door, 
And hide yourself in angry gloom? 

And why, again, should you not have 
One purpose only, one sole word, 
Ringing forever round my heart. 
Plainly delivered, plainly heard? 

Your conversation fills my brain 
And tortures all my life, and yet 
Gives no result. I often think 
You've grown so old that you forget; 

And having learnt man's fatal trick 
Of talking, talking, talking still. 
You're tired of definite design. 
And laugh at having lost your will. 

Harold Monro 


HILLSIDE POEMS 



WINTER RAIN 



It is sad, this rain 

Drip-dripping in the night 

Monotonously 

Into the snow; 

Dripping from the corners of the house 

And the ends of black twigs 

All night long without change. 

Rain, rain soft-fingered, 

Lifting up the white snow, 

Uncovering the clay beneath; 

Rain, soft. 

Almost unwilling — 

The fingers of an old woman 

Who cannot resist 

Slipping downstairs in the night 

To the front room. 

And lifting the sheet for a last look 

At what it conceals. 



A NAKED MAPLE 

You have put off your leaves. 

You are like a runner who stands naked at the mark. 

Calm and certain of victory. 



You are glorious in your ease, 

Waiting for the first silver whistle of the snow; 

And in your sureness 

That the yellow medal of a May moon will be pinned to 

your breast, 
Clothed again and triumphant. 

NOONTIME 

Noontime and locusts, 

Locusts goading the heat 

Quivering over the hay-fields; 

Yet the men arise from half-eaten dinners 

And hood canvas over the stacks — 

The full tawny breasts of the hayfields — 

For the first dark finger of lust 

Is pointing over a steeple 

Far in the distance. 



JUDGES 

Between her two brothers, 
Who argue of nations and laws 
With a neighbor. 
She stands, big with a child, 
Watching the sunshine; 
Waiting the end of their talk. 
Saying nothing. 


Frederick R. McCreary 

ALONE ON THE HILL 

Alone on the hill 

In the warm October noon> 

With the woods below 

And beyond their brilliance the sea: 

The moment has come. 

The rapt still instant of being, 

When water and wood are gone. 

There is nothing now 

But the on-running fluid of hours 

Gleaming with blue, yellow, crimson. 

Now quick! Let me run on sharp stones. 

Let me strangle in surf choked with the bitter salt-water! 

Let me feel pain, feel torture. 

And the acid hunger of loneliness! 

Give me self, self — 

Before I am lost 

In this madness of space eternal, 

This horror of dream triumphant. 

Frederick R. McCreary 


INCIDENTALS 

DUST IN THE ROAD 

The dust 

Is a yellow-grey veil 

Over the limbs of the wind. 

And the little breeze dons it, 

That her fleet litheness, 

And the whirling torsions of her sprite's form, 

May be apparent 

As she gaily runs down the road 

To greet us. 

TAPS 

Out of the night, 

Up from the serene valley of the Missouri, 

Over the free forested Kansas hills 

Come notes of a bugle — 

Mincing, silver-slippered steps of music. 

THE STAR 

When the "screws" had made their last round 
And the lights in the cells were out, 
I arose and peered out the window. 
And just over the edge of the prison-wall 
I saw a tiny, twinkling, yellow star 


Hi Simons 



Furtively winking at me, 

Like the eye of the Infinite; 

Mischievously happy 

Because it had slipped me a bit of joy 

Over the wall, from "the outside." 

PORTRAIT OF AN OLD ROUfi 

The seeds of his sin 

Thrust tiny red roots 

Among the cell-crevices of his face. 

Now their minute purple tendrils 

Trace, on his cheeks and nose, 

Vine-patterns as intricately beautiful 

As his fastidious iniquities. 



Hi Simons 



TAK FOR SIDST 

To C. S. 
"Good-bye," you said, and your voice was an echo, a 

promise. 
You turned to go, a grey iron ghost. 
The night took you. 
Insubstantial as air, stronger than iron. 
You were here and had gone. 
Your voice was an omen, an echo. 

Batette Beutsch 
IN THE OFFICE 

THE GUARDIANS 

Old men nodding over great books, 

Always writing with gold pens, 

Every morning 

Adding figures, 

Turning pages; 

Every morning 

A little grayer, 

A little mustier, 

A little older. 

Old men! — do you keep Age 
Hidden between your desks? 
V^^U she catch me 
If I come down to ask you 
For the October statement? 

AILEEN 

She goes through the order of the day 

Like a nun. 

The rattle of her typewriter 

Is the rustle of a rosary; 

And she speaks in the telephone 

With the retreated delicacy 

Of one who murmurs before an altar. 

Gwendolen Haste 


MOTHERHOOD 

Playing alone by the ocean's edge» 

Eager and unafraid. 
You are the child I used to be, 

Playing the games I played. 

Now I have only a coward's heart, 

Finding you all too dear. 
Learning at last that love shall teach | 

The fearless how to fear. i 

You are so little against the sky, 

Laughing and undismayed — 
Oh, little son by the ocean's edge, 

I am afraid, afraid! 

Medora C. Addison I 



THE LOVER 

You do not know the wonder I will pour on your name- 
It will burst like thunder with all heaven for a frame! 
I will raise it as a flame that the wind blows under, 
I will cast myself asunder — to my shame, to my blame! 
I will make a fame, a wonder of your name. 

Paul Tanaquil 

FIRE 

Love, let us light 

A fire tonight, 

A wood fire on the hearth. 

With torn and living tongues the flames leap. 

Hungrily 

They catch and lift, to beat their sudden wings 

Toward freedom and the sky. 

The hot wood sings 

And crackles in a pungent ecstasy 

That seems half pain of death, and half a vast 

Triumphant exultation of release 

That its slow life-time of lethargic peace 

Should come to this wild rapture at the last. 

We watch it idly, and our casual speech 

Drops slowly into silence. 

Something stirs and struggles in me. 

Something out of reach 

Of surface thoughts, a slow and formless thing— 

Not I, but a dim memory 

Born of the dead behind me. In my blood 

The blind race turns, groping and faltering. 

Desires 

Only half glimpsed, not understood. 

Stir me and shake me. Fires 


Eunice Tietjens 

Answer the fire, and vague shapes pass 
Like shapes of wind across the grass. 

The red flames catch and lift. 

Roaring and sucking in a furious blaze; 

And a strange, swift 

Hunger for violence is in me. My blood pounds 

With a dark memory of age-old days, 

And mad red nights I never knew. 

When the dead in me lived, and horrid sounds 

Broke from their furry throats. 

In drunken rounds. 

Blood-crazed, they danced before the leaping flames, 

While something twisted in the fire. . . . 

Now as the flames mount higher 

Strange pictures pass. I cannot see them quite 

And yet I feel them. 

I am in a dread 
Dark temple, and I beat my head 
In maddened rite. 
Before the red-hot belly of a god 
Who eats his worshippers. . . . 

This is a funeral pyre 
And one lies dead 

Who was my life. The fat smoke curls and eddies. 
Beckoning suttee. . . . 

But the moment slips 
To Bacchanalian revels — quick hot lips 

And leaping limbs, lit by the glare 
Of human torches. . . . 

A sudden spark 

Goes crackling upward, followed by a shower; 

And I am in the hills, cool hills and dark. 

Primeval as the fire. The beacon flare 

Leaps in a roaring tower. 

Spattering in sparks among the stars 

Tales of wild wars. 

And on a distant crest 

Its mate makes answer. . . . 

But the embers gleam 

Like molten metal steaming at a forge. 

Where with rough jest 

Great lusty fellows 

Ply the roaring bellows, 

And clang the song of labor — and the dream 

Man builds in metal. . . . 

Now the red flame steadies. 
Softly and quietly it burns. 
Purring, and its embers wear 
A friendly and domestic air. 

This is the hearth-fire — home and peace at last. 
Comfort and safety are attendant here. 
The primal fear 
Is shut away, to whistle in the blast 


Eunice Tietjens 

Beyond the doorway where the shadows twine. 

The fire is safety, and the fire is home, 

Light, warmth and food. Here careless children come 

Filling the place with laughter; 

And after 

Men make good council-talk, and old men spin, 

With that great quiet of the wise. 

Tales of dead beauty, and of dying eyes. 

The fire is drooping now. A log falls in 

Softly upon itself, like one grown tired 

With ecstasy. The lithe tongues sink 

In ash and ember: 

And something I remember 

From ages gone — and yet I cannot think — 

Some secret of the end. 

Of earth grown old, and death turned friend, 

And man who passes 

Like flame, like light, like wind across the grasses. 

Ah, what was that? A sudden terror sped 
Behind me in the shadows. I am cold; 
And I should like your hand to hold 
Now that the fire is dead. 
Love, light the lamp, and come away to bed. 
Fire is a strange thing, burning in your head. 

Eunice Tietjens 


COMMENT 

THE UTTERANCE OF POETRY 

IN the Literary Review of a recent New York Evening 
Post Lawrence Mason tells whimsically of the tortures 
he has endured in hearing poetry read aloud. Listing 
"several different methods," he says: 

Some chant or intone it in a dulcet sing-song that woos reluctant 
slumber from her lair. Some attack it with athletic vigor, and pride 
themselves upon the sheer speed of their delivery. Others find the 
summum bonum in emphasizing the beat with the deadly regularity of 
a metronome. Still others coldly isolate and anatomize each line till 
there is no more savor in it than in a dried prune. Others, again, so 
boggle and halt and garble and apologize and re-read that the hearer 
is driven to madness, despair, or violent revolt. 

And he refers to a cousin "whose method is none of 
these — his sole and sufficient guiding principle is to con- 
ceal from his unfortunate hearers every evidence of 
versification." 

Mr. Mason's suffering reminds me of my own experience 
with a certain "eminent dramatic revelator" (so adver- 
tised) who for two seasons has given expensive recitals 
in Chicago under the alleged patronage of women of 
social prominence, of whom some, as I definitely ascer- 
tained, had never consented to the use of their names, 
and others had consented in a mistaken impulse of 
kindliness while in blessed ignorance of the man and 
his "art." The revelator, whose programs ranged from 
Othello to DeiuraUy followed the method of Mr. Mason's 


The Utterance of Poetry 

cousin, but enriched it with a kind of vocal gymnastics 
inherited from the elocutionary school of the eighteen- 
seventies. While the three-doUar-a-head audience sat 
in silence under the infliction, I amused myself, during 
the half-hour or so that a heroic sense of duty held me 
there, in certain speculations about the simple, but much 
abused art of reading poetry aloud. 

It would seem to be a rare gift — the beautiful reading 
of poetry. Even the poets themselves are often dis- 
appointing, though there is usually a degree of beauty 
and illumination to be gained from a poet's reading of his 
own verse. The poet instinctively emphasizes rhythm, 
sometimes even to the point of intoning or chanting it; 
indeed, he rarely carries this too far. But not all poets 
have good voices, an accent neither too local nor too 
studiedly correct, and a simple effective delivery. 

Certain poets, of course, it is a privilege to hear — their 
reading is as much a work of art as the poem, and the 
two fit together in indissoluble unity. I used to feel this 
of Lindsay, whose first reading of The Congo at Poetry's 
first banquet — in March, 1914 — was a triumph in the 
double art. But of late Lindsay has acquired bad habits 
— his reading has become too loud and melodramatic. 
John Masefield's very simple reading of his poems is 
beautiful beyond words, because of that marvellous bass 
voice of his, rich with all the sorrows of the world. Carl 
Sandburg also has a deep-toned organ in his throat which 
he uses with subtle simplicity in the proof of his delicate 

rhythms. The fine voice of William Butler Yeats is 
of higher pitch than these; his quiet intoning of poetry 
nobly illustrates its beauty. Lew Sarett's presentation 
of his Indian poems is their perfect and almost necessary 
completion. Robert Frost's personality and voice also 
fulfil and emphasize the quality of his poems. Witter 
Bynner has a rich voice and graceful delivery, but an 
over-precise utterance mars the effect of his reading 
for me. Alfred Kreymborg, Carlos Williams, .Maxwell 
Bodenheim — each of these complements his very per- 
sonal rhythm in the utterance of his poems. And Padraic 
Colum brings to us the authentic Celtic tune — he is 
even more of an Irishman than Mr. Yeats. 

I wish I could say as much for the women. Amy 
Lowell, Eunice Tietjens, Lola Ridge, Helen Hoyt, Mar- 
jorie SeifFert, Florence Frank, Jean Untermeycr — all these 
read well, some of them brilliantly; all simply, and in 
rhythmic fulfilment of their poems. But none of them 
with quite the artistic beauty which some of the men have 
attained. 

On the stage one rarely hears beautiful utterance of 
poetry. In all my unusual experience of theatricalized 
Shakespeare, which, beginning with Edwin Booth in 
my sixth year, includes almost every distinguished 
interpreter since his time, I have heard only one whose 
reading of the lines — no, not reading, not anything re- 
membered and recited — whose spontaneous utterance of 
the lines — seems to me of such perfection, such strange 


The Utterance of Poetry 

and consummate beauty, as to be forever memorable 
and — alas — incomparable. This was Ada Rehan: to 
hear her as Viola or Rosalind was to be moved by a voice, 
deep and rich like falling waters, which turned English 
words into speech-music of transcendent quality, music 
that moved one like Kubelik's violin or Isadora Duncan's 
dancing. 

Among women, Ellen Terry was perhaps Miss Rehan's 
closest rival; but her voice was not quite so bitter-sweet, 
and there was a slight jerkiness in her delivery which 
gave it vitality and picturesqueness but detracted from 
absolute music. Mary Anderson had a voice like a cello, 
of extraordinary richness and range, and a fine sense of 
poetic cadence; but her delivery, though beautiful, to be 
remembered always with joy, was more deliberate and 
studied, leaning more to the old rhetorical school. 

Booth was wonderful, of course — my youth shone with 
the romantic glamour of him. But it must be admitted 
that Booth mouthed his lines by overstressing his con- 
sonants, and that his delivery was not the spontaneous 
utterance of perfect art but the brilliant recital of speeches 
learned. He was a great artist of his Victorian time and 
his somewhat rhetorical school; but he was not an orig- 
inator, not one of the genius-illumined who strike out 
new times, new methods. 

Henry Irving had a more far-seeing mind, but his gift 
was for the spectacular. His speech was gusty and 
storm-ridden, his cadences churned and broken like a bold 

skifF outriding a gale. It was an adventure to listen to 
the lines of his Shylock — the poetry was so often in danger 
and so unexpectedly triumphant. He ranted early and 
often, but his ranting was always in the picture, always 
in the service of a deliberate conventionalization, a 
planned and achieved pattern. The modern poetic drama 
has scrapped his particular convention; but we may still 
envy him his skill, for we cannot yet claim to have estab- 
lished our own convention. 

If Booth and Irving ranted sometimes, Lawrence 
Barrett ranted always; and John McCullough was seldom 
above the temptation, although his robust blank verse 
had always a certain beauty of cadence. Richard 
Mansfield came in a time of more simple Thespian 
manners, but he broke up the lines, he had no sense of 
rhythm; whether in Henry Fifth or Beau Brummel^ he 
spoke always prose. Of all the male actors I have heard, 
Forbes-Robertson is the most assured master of poetic 
cadence; but his reading of Shakespeare, though beautiful, 
is sophisticated and deliberate — it lacks the spontaneity, 
and also the variety, which made Ada Rehan's, and even 
Ellen Terry's, a continual flaring of new fires. 

The Irish Players are rhythmically endowed beyond any 
other company of my remembrance; which is not strange, 
since Irish speech is musical with poetic cadence, and 
these players were trained by Synge and Yeats and Lady 
Gregory, the three poets who have used it to the highest 
poetic purpose. This beautiful rhythmic speech has been 


The Utterance of Poetry 

the secret of their charm, the one most potent reason for 
the effect of artistic unity and beauty in their rendition of 
the great plays of the Celtic renaissance. 

The subject has led me to reminiscence when inquiry 
was intended — we have lingered with the masters instead 
of seeking examples in common life. If few actors read 
poetry with due r^ard for the rhythm, still fewer public 
readers have any conception of the primary principles of 
the art they profess, even when they have freed themselves 
of the hideous old elocutionary tradition which deliber- 
ately destroyed poetic cadence, broke up the lines, and 
turned poetry into agonizing prose. 

This tradition is chiefly to blame for banishing from 
modern life an art which should be at least as common and 
friendly a pleasure and solace as music. A good voice, a 
sense of rhythm, simple unexaggerated utterance, all 
showing respect for the line and revealing the larger 
cadences which overlie the basic pattern — such a combina- 
tion may make the reading-aloud of poetry, in any house- 
hold or group of friends, a joy as fine as the excellent 
plajring of a musical instrument. 

More encouragement of this art might reveal and 
develop exceptional talent in persons scarcely aware of 
it. I remember an exquisite out-door presentation of 
Ernest Dowson's Pierrot of the Minute by two young 
sisters who had never realized their rare gift for the most 
delicate musical subtleties of poetic dialogue. And in the 
history department of the University of Chicago hides a 

certain modest professor whose reading of the Ode to a 
Nightingale gives his friends an experience as magnificent 
as Muratore ever oflfered with his proudest solo, or 
Paderewski in his palmiest days. 

The reading of poetry should be an easily accessible 
delight instead of the bore which it usually is. The defect 
chiefly to be avoided is a certain high-sounding rotundity 
which most people assume like a toga when they start to 
read poetry aloud. Most voices need training, to be sure, 
to develop the latent beauty in them; every school should 
teach the proper use of this delicate musical instrument 
within us. Given a good voice properly controlled, an 
ear for poetic rhythm, and the simplest possible observance 
of the pitches and tones of poetically enhanced speech, 
and you have the beginning of good reading of poetry — a 
beginning which practice, and the stimulus of emotional 
and imaginative intensity, may develop into high artistic 
beauty. H. A/. 

TRANSLATING WANG WEI 

Just as Tu Fu and Li Po are often spoken of in conjunc- 
tion by the Chinese, so are two other great poets of the 
T'ang Dynasty, Meng Hao-jan and Wang Wei. The 
latter, who lived 699-759 A. D., is distinguished among the 
poets of China by a deep and beautiful optimism. The 
melancholy that wounded Tu Fu and Meng Hao-jan 
seems not to have touched Wang Wei beneath the surface. 


Translating fVang Wei 

And, whereas Li Po sought in wine solace from the ills and 
sorrows of life, Wang Wei found an abiding content in the 
"green and healing hills" and in the highly humbled 
and attuned mysticism of Lao-tzu's teaching. 

As a young man, Wang Wei became Assistant Secretary 
of State; but at the age of thirty-one, when his wife died, 
he left his post and retired to live near Mount Chung-nan. 
Two of his poems about Mount Chung-nan are published 
in this number, both breathing the sober sweetness and 
simplicity of his retired life. One of them begins with the 
line, "My heart in middle age found the Way"; the 
Chinese word for the Way being Tao, the first character 
of the title of Lao-tzu's book, Tao-Te-Chingy which may 
be translated in whole as The Way and the Exemplification. 
Taoism appears, then, to have been the consolation of 
Wang Wei, although Professor Herbert JVf . Giles, in his 
volume Chinese Literature^ declares it to have been 
Buddhism. We realize, not only from the direct statement 
in this one poem, but from the spirit of all his poems, that 
he had serenely accepted the Way, the natural way of the 
universe. 

There was for a while a strong division between the 
followers of Lao-tzu and the followers of Confucius. Po 
Chu-yi ridiculed Taoist doctrines in the following four 
lines, crisply translated by Professor Giles: 

" Who know speak not, who speak know naught, " 

Are words from Lao-tzu's lore. 
What then becomes of Lao-tzu's own 
Five thousand words or more? 


 



0. 




 

The answer is that Lao-tzu's words, fused now with both 
Buddhism and Confucianism, have become an integral 
part of the religion of China. Here are two characteristic 
quotations from his gospel: 

Follow diligently the Way in your own heart, but make no display 
of it to the world. 

Do nothing, and all things will be done. 

Among the selections printed in this issue, note the last 
two lines of the poem, Answering Vice-Prefect Chang: a 
question asked in terms of complicated morality and 
answered in terms of simple happiness: 

You ask me about good and evil? 

Hark, on the lake there's a fisherman singing. 

This does not mean that the ideal Taoist literally ''did 
nothing." As a matter of fact Wang Wei was a physician, 
a high government official, a great poet, and also one of 
China's most illustrious painters. (A scroll attributed to 
him is on view at the Metropolitan Museum in New 
York.) His activities, however, were all in flow with 
universal forces: they sang like the fisherman — there was 
no fret, no jealousy, no self-exaltation, no irritated 
struggle; only harmony, humility, exalted identity with 
nature — a true and wide knowledge of values, making 
him a master of words, a master of the brush, and a 
master of life. Yes, there was a sure gaiety in Wang Wei, 
instanced in his Message to P*ai Ti^ the fellow-poet with 
whom he longed to drink again and to ''sing a wild 


Translating Wang Wei 

poem**; or in the verses already mentioned, My Retreat at 

Chung-nany in which he happily anticipated the day 

when he should "meet an old wood-cutter, and talk and 

laugh and never return." 

In the last two lines of the poem to P'ai Ti, he addressed 

his friend, according to a too frequent Chinese manner, by 

the name of Chieh-yu, who was a recluse of the Ch'u 

kingdom, famous somewhat for drinking, but more for 

stopping Confucius' chariot and warning him against 

politics with the song: 

O phoenix, O phoenix, 

Virtue is corrupted! 

What is past is past all counsel, 

What is future may be moulded. . . . 

G)me away! Come away! 

Politics are dangerous! 

And Wang Wei's reference in the final line of this same 
poem is to the place where he will be drinking with his 
friend; yet Five Willows is the place named, where long 
ago T'ao Ch'ien had lived, another . famous recluse who 
was both a great writer and a great drinker. 

The last two lines of the poem In my Lodge at Wang- 
CKuan after a Long Rain^ clear and significant as they are 
in themselves, yet contain, for the Chinese reader, enrich- 
ing allusion and connotation. There was once a scholar, 
Yang-tzu, who, before he became a student of Lao-tzu, 
was highly respected and honored by his fellow-men. 
Later, through the many years of his discipleship, he lost 
his prestige, and even a boor would take precedence over 

him; but he was glad because he had formerly been 
proud and pretentious. The last line refers to a hermit 
who was fond of sea-gulls; they followed him wherever he 
went. His father asked why they were not afraid and 
bade the son bring him some; but next day, when the 
hermit went out intending to take them to his father, 
they all flew away. 

The poem in the group most in need of explanation, 
because of its allusion to historic events and personages, 
is The Beautiful Hsi-shih; and the last two lines of 
A Song of Young Girls from Lo-Yang also require the 
following summary: 

During the Chou Dynasty, when the Yueh kingdom 
was conquered by the Wu kingdom, the Yueh king still 
held his throne and plotted to throw oflf the tributary 
yoke. Aided by his able minister, Fan Li, he planned to 
distract the king of Wu with women. Fan Li searched 
through the Yueh kingdom for girls to beguile him and 
came upon Hsi-shih washing clothes by a lake. Conquer- 
ing his own love for her, he fiercely persuaded her to his 
scheme. She remained at court for some time; and the 
Wu king, in his infatuation, forgot aflFairs of state. 
Weakened by this means, the Wu kingdom was overcome 
by the Yueh kingdom; and Fan Li eventually accepted 
Hsi-shih as his reward. The whimsical phrasing of the 
line "If by wrinkling their brows they can copy her 
beauty" alludes to the fact that she had heart trouble, 
and it was said, that her drawn brows, her look of gentle- 


Translating fVang Wei 

ness in suffering, which the girls of her time tried unsuc- 
cessfully to imitate, made her more beautiful. 

One might enlarge upon references in others of the 
poems. For instance, the quatrain called Lines contains 
the phrase "my silken window." This is not a decorative 
adjective. It merely means that, before the use of paper 
or glass, windows in China were of silk. The last line of 
the same poem is made lovelier by knowledge that the 
mei^ or plum blossom, is in China the earliest flower of 
spring. It is interesting to know that A Song at Wei- 
Chengy which was written for music, is still popular 
through China as a song of farewell, and that to this day 
"since we picked willow-branches at Wei-Cheng" means 
"since we parted." The beauty of the four lines called 
A Partingy with its simple, profound expression of the 
abiding presence of friendly nature and the transient 
presence of friendly man, is heightened by the reader's 
response to the grace of the name Wang Sun, which from 
a dim and ancient origin still means in China a noble- 
hearted young scholar, or sometimes lover. But on the 
whole, these T'ang poems are so valid and universal in 
uttering beauty that they may vitally enter the poetic 
consciousness of a westerner still ignorant of the various 
allusions. 

Translating the work of Wang Wei and others in the 
Three Hundred Poems of the Vang Dynasty ^ Dr. Kiang and 
I have tried constantly to transfer the Chinese idiom into 
an equivalent idiom in English, rather than to stress the 

local novelty and pungency of Chinese phrasing. It 
would be as erroneous to overemphasize the component 
radicals of a Chinese character as to overemphasize the 
component meanings of such words in English as day- 
break, breakfast, nightfall or landscape. The delicate 
importance of the translator's office lies in bringing from 
one language to another the rounded and proportioned 
effect of a whole poem. And we, conscientiously, have 
tried to make felt, in our translations, the high honesty 
and wise humanness of poets who have in many ways, and 
in one Wei especially, lived closer to the heart of life than 
importunate passion brings the poets of the West. 

Witter Bynner 

Aote by the Editor: Mr. Bynner s preference for the line of four feet 
and for the four-line or eight-line poem is his tribute to the close prosodic 
structure of Chinese poetry. In the translator's opinion the form he 
has chosen is the closest approach to the original which is possible in 
English. 

REVIEWS 

A COOL MASTER 

Collected Poems of Edwin Arlington Robinson (with por- 
trait frontispiece). Macmillan Co. 
Near the middle of the last century, Ralph Waldo 
Emerson, a sentimental philosopher with a genius for 
a sudden twisted hardness of words, wrote lines like: 

Daughters of Time, the hypocritic days, 
Muffled and dumb like barefoot dervishes, 


A Cool Master 

And marching single in an endless file. 
Bring diadems and fagots in their hands. 

And It was with Emerson that American poetry may be 
said to have begun. 'He was slight enough, but at his 
best a master, and above all a master of sound. And he 
began a tradition that still exists. 

He was followed shortly by Emily Dickinson, a master 
of a certain dowdy but undeniably effective mannerism, 
a spinster who may have written her poems to keep time 
with her broom. A terrible woman, who annihilated God 
as if He were her neighbor, and her neighbor as if he were 
God — all with a leaf or a sunbeam that chanced to fall 
within her sight as she looked out the window or the door 
during a pause in her sweeping: 

And we, we placed the hair, 
And drew the head erect; 
And then an awful leisure was, 
Our faith to regulate. 

The woman at her most terrible had the majesty of an 
erect corpse, a prophet of unspeakable doom; and she 
spoke through sealed lips. She was greater than Emerson, 
was one of the greatest poets of our language, but was 
more or less in the tradition that Emerson began. She 
and Emerson were probably the only poets of any per- 
manently great importance who occurred in this country 
during their period. 

The tradition of New England hardness has been 
carried on by Mr. Robinson, in many ways may be said 

[279I 




 

to have reached its pinnacle in Mr. Robinson. This poet, 
with a wider culture than his predecessors, has linked a 
suavity of manner to an even greater desperation than 
that of Dickinson's The Last Night — his hardness has 
become a polished stoniness of vision, of mind. 

This man has the culture to know that to those to 
whom philosophy is comprehensible it is not a matter of 
the first importance; and he knows that these people are 
not greatly impressed by a ballyhoo statement of the 
principles of social or spiritual salvation. A few times he 
has given his opinion, but quietly and intelligently, and 
has then passed on to other things. A man's philosophical 
belief or attitude is certain to be an important part of his 
milieu, and as a part of his milieu may give rise to percep- 
tions, images. His philosophy becomes a part of his life 
as does the country in which he was born, and will tinge 
his vision of the country in which he was born as that 
country may aflfect his philosophy. So long as he gives 
us his own perceptions as they arise in this milieu, he re- 
mains an artist. When he becomes more interested in 
the possible eflfects of his beliefs upon others, and expounds 
or persuades, he begins to deal with generalities, concepts 
(see][Croce), and becomes a philosopher, or more than 
likely a preacher, a mere peddler. This was the fallacy of 
Whitman and many of the English Victorians, and this 
is what invalidates nearly all of Whitman's work. Such 
men forget that it is only the particular, the perception, 
that is perpetually startling. The generality, or concept, 


A Cool Master 

can be pigeon-holed, absorbed, and forgotten. And a 
ballyhoo statement of a concept is seldom a concise one — 
it is neither fish nor flesh. That is why Whitman is 
doomed to an eventual dull vacuum that the intricately 
delicate mind of Plato will never know. 

Much praise has fallen to Mr. Robinson because he 
deals with people, "humanity"; and this is a fallacy of 
inaccurate brains. Humanity is simply Mr. Robinson's 
physical milieu; the thing, the compound of the things, he 
sees. It is not the material that makes a poem great, but 
the perception and organization of that material. A 
pigeon's wing may make as great an image as a man's 
tragedy, and in the poetry of Mr. Wallace Stevens has 
done so. Mr. Robinson's greatness lies not in the people 
of whom he has written, but in the perfect balance, the 
infallible precision, with which he has stated their cases. 

Mr. Robinson's work may be classified roughly in two 
groups — his blank verse, and his more closely rhymed 
poems, including the sonnets. Of his blank verse, the 
Octaves in The Children of the Night fall curiously into a 
group by themselves, and will be considered elsewhere in 
this review. The other poems in blank verse may be 
called sketches — some of people the poet may have known, 
some of historical figures, some of l^endary — and they 
have all the evanescence, brittleness, of sketches. How- 
ever, there are passages in many of these poems that an- 
ticipate Robert Frost, who in at least one poem. An Old 
Man*s fFinter Nighty has used this method with greater 

effect than its innovator, and has created a great poem. 

Mr. Frost, of course, leaves more of the bark on his 

rhythms, achieves a sort of implied colloquialism which 

has already been too much discussed. But with Frost in 

mind, consider this passage from Isaac and Archibald: 

A journey that I made one afternoon 
With Isaac to find out what Archibald 
Was doing with his oats. It was high time 
Those oats were cut, said Isaac; and he feared 
That Archibald — well, he could never feel 
Quite sure of Archibald. Accordingly 
The good old man invited me — that is. 
Permitted me — to go along with him; 
And I, with a small boy's adhesiveness 
To competent old age, got up and went. 

The similarity to Frost is marked, as is also the pleasing 
but not profound quality of the verse. It has a distinc- 
tion, however, that many contemporaries — French as well 
as English and American — could acquire to good advan- 
tage. 

Ben Jonson Entertains a Man from Stratford^ a much 
praised poem, seems largely garrulous, occasionally 
brilliant, and always brittle; and one can go on making 
very similar comments on the other poems in this form, 
until one comes to those alternately praised and lamented 
poems. Merlin and Lancelot. Remembering Tennyson, 
one's first inclination is to name these poems great, and 
certainly they are not inconsiderable. But there are 
long passages of purely literary frittering, and passages 
that, while they may possess a certain clean distinction of 


A Cool Master 

manner, are dry and unremunerative enough. But there 
are passages in these poems which are finer than any other 
blank verse Mr. Robinson has written — dark, massive 
lines that rise out of the poem and leave one bitter and 
empty: 

On Dagonet the silent hand of Merlin 
Weighed now as Kving iron that held him down 
With a primeval power. Doubt, wonderment. 
Impatience, and a self-accusing sorrow 
Born of an ancient love, possessed and held him 
Until his love was more than he could name, 
And he was Merlin's fool, not Arthur's now: 
"Say what you will, I say that I'm the fool 
Of Merlin, King of Nowhere; which is Here. 
With you for king and me for court, what else 
Have we to sigh for but a place to sleep?" 

But passing on from this less important side of Mr. 
Robinson's work to his rhymed poems, one finds at least 
a large number of perfectly executed poems of a sensitive 
and feline approach. What eflFect rhyme, or the intention 
of rhyme, has upon an artist's product, is a difficult thing 
to estimate. The question verges almost upon the 
metaphysical. The artist, creating, lives at a point of 
intensity, and whether the material is consciously digested 
before that point is reached, and is simply organized and 
set down at the time of creation; or whether the point of 
intensity is first reached and the material then drawn out 
of the subconscious, doubtless depends a good deal on the 
individual poet, perhaps on the individual poem. The 
latter method presupposes a great deal of previous 


absorption of sense impressions, and is probably the more 
valid, or at least the more generally efFective, method. 
For the rhythm and the "matter," as they come into 
being simultaneously and interdependent, will be perfectly 
fused and without loose ends. The man who comes to a 
form with a definitely outlined matter, will, more than 
likely, have to cram or fill before he has finished, and the 
result is broken. The second method does not, of course, 
presuppose rhyme, but it seems that rhyme, as an obstacle, 
will force the issue. 

The best of Mr. Robinson's poems appear to have 
come into being very much in this second fashion. He 
has spun his images out of a world of sense and thought 
that have been a part of him so long that he seems to 
have forgot their beginning — has spun these images out 
as the movement of his lines, the recurrence of his rhymes, 
have demanded them. A basic philosophy and emotional 
viewpoint have provided the necessary unity. 

This method inevitably focuses the artist's mind upon 
the object of the instant, makes it one with that object, 
and eliminates practically all individual "personality" or 
self-consciousness. The so-called personal touch is reduced 
to a minimum of technical habit that is bound to accrue in 
time to any poet who studies his medium with an eye to 
his individual needs. The man of some intelligence who 
cannot, or can seldom, achieve this condition of fusion 
with his object, is driven back to his ingenuity; and this 
man, if he have sufficient intelligence or ingenuity, 


A Cool Master 

becomes one of the "vigorous personalities" of poetry; 
and he misses poetry exactly in so far as his personality is 
vigorous. Browning, on two or three occasions one of 
the greatest of all poets, is, for the most part, simply the 
greatest of ingenious versifiers. He was so curious of the 
quirks with which he could approach an object, that he 
forgot the object in admiring, and expecting admiration 
for, himself. And it is for this reason that Mr. Robinson, 
working in more or less the same field as Browning, is the 
superior of Browning at almost every turn. 

And it is for this reason also that Mr. Robinson's Ben 
Jonson is a failure. For the poet, while in no wise con- 
cerned with his own personality, is so intent upon the 
personality of Jonson, his speaker, that, for the sake of 
Jonson*s vigor, he becomes talkative and eager of identify- 
ing mannerism; and the result is, that Shakespeare, about 
whom the poem is written, comes to the surface only here 
and there, and any actual image almost never. 

The following stanza is an example of Mr. Robinson's 

work at its best: 

And like a giant haq> that hums 
On always, and is always blending 
The coming of what never comes 
With what has past and had an ending, 
The City trembles, throbs, and poundhs 
Outside, and through a thousand sounds 
The small intolerable drums 
Of Time are like slow drops descending. 

And there is the compact, intensely contemplated state- 
ment of Eros TurannoSy a poem that is, in forty-eight 

lines> as complete as a Lawrence novel. And the nimble 
trickery of Miniver Cheevey^ as finished a piece of bur- 
lesque as one can find in English. A few of us have 
feared, in the last few years, that Mr. Robinson was 
deteriorating; but going through this book one is reas- 
sured. If there is nothing in The Three Taverns to equal 
Eros TurannoSy there are at least two or three poems as 
great as any save that one Mr. Robinson has written; and 
there is nothing in these last poems to preclude the 
possibility of another Eros Turannos. 

Mr. Robinson, as probably the highest point in his 
tradition, has been followed by Frost, a more specialized, 
and generally softer artist. And there is Gould, who, if 
he belongs to the tradition at all, is a mere breaking-up of 
the tradition, a fusion with Whitman. But in considering 
the work of a man of so varied a genius as Mr. Robinson, 
it is interesting, if not over-important, to observe the 
modes of expression that he has anticipated if not actually 
influenced; even where he has not chosen, or has not been 
able to develop, these modes. 

The resemblance in matter and manner, save for Mr. 
Robinson's greater suavity, of certain poems, especially 
the sonnets, in The Children of the Nighty to the epitaphs in 
The Spoon River Anthology y has been noted by other 
writers; and I believe it has been said that Mr. Masters 
was ignorant of the existence of these poems until after 
the Anthology was written. There is little to be said about 
such a poem as Mr. Robinson's Luke Havergal: 


A Cool Master 

No, there is not a dawn in eastern skies 
To rift the fiery night that's in your eyes; 
But there, where western glooms are gathering, 
The dark will end the dark, if anything: 
God slays Himself with every leaf that flies. 
And hell is more than half of paradise. 
No, there is not a dawn in eastern skies — 
In eastern skies. 

Out of a grave I come to tell you this. 
Out of a grave I come to quench the kiss 
That flames upon your forehead with a glow 
That blinds you to the way that you must go. 

And Mr. Masters' satire has been forestalled and outdone 

in these early sonnets. 

But a more curious and interesting resemblance to a 

later poet is found in the Octaves in the same volume: 

To me the groaning of world-worshippers 
Rings like a lonely music played in hell 
By one with art enough to cleave the walls 
Of heaven with his cadence, but without 
The wisdom or the will to comprehend 
The strangeness of his own perversity. 
And all without the courage to deny 
The profit and the pride of his defeat. 

If the actual thought of this passage is not that of Wallace 
Stevens, nevertheless the quality of the thought, the 
manner of thinking, as well as the style, quite definitely is. 
To what extent Mr. Robinson may have influenced this 
greatest of living and of American poets, one cannot say, 
but in at least three of the Octaves^ one phase of Mr. 
Stevens* later work — that of Le Monocle de Mon Oncle 
and other recent and shorter poems — is certainly fore- 

shadowed. Mr. Robinson's sound is inevitably the less 
rich, the less masterly. 

In another of the Octaves there are a few lines that 
suggest the earlier poems of Mr. T. S. Eliot, but the resem- 
blance is fleeting and apparently accidental. 

If the tradition of New England seems to be reaching 
an end in the work of Mr. Frost, Mr. Robinson has at 
least helped greatly in the founding of a tradition of 
culture and clean workmanship that such poets as Messrs. 
Stevens, Eliot, and Pound, as H. D. and Marianne 
Moore, are carrying on. Mr. Robinson was, when he 
began, as much a pioneer as Mr. Pound or Mr. Yeats, 
and he has certainly achieved as great poetry. While the 
tradition begun, more or less, by Whitman, has deterio- 
rated, in. the later work of Mr. Carl Sandburg, into a sort 
of plasmodial delirium; and while the school of mellifluous 
and almost ominous stage-trappings, as exemplified by 
Poe, has melted into a sort of post-Celtic twilight, and 
has nearly vanished in the work of Mr. Aiken; the work 
of these writers and a few others stands out clear and hard 
in the half-light of our culture. I cannot forget that they 
exist, even in the face of the desert. Yvor fVinters 

MR. VEATS' PLAYS 

Four Plays for Dancers^ by William Butler Yeats. Mac- 

millan Co. 

Mr. Yeats is one of the few poets writing poetic plays 
who are also, in exact meaning, men of the theatre. Just 


Mr. Yeats* Plays 

as he is probably the foremost poet of his generation, so 
he shares with Gordon Craig and one or two others the 
distinction of having seen furthest into the theatre as it 
may become. That youth which in the Irish temperament 
is so old as to be imperishable has retained for him his 
leadership in the poetic drama and in the exploration of 
new forms. Four Plays /or Dancers y as in its own time 
The Land of Hearths Desire (written "without adequate 
knowledge of the stage"!), is the work of a pioneer bring- 
ing a form to its perfection with no apparent interval of 
apprenticeship. 

"My blunder has been," he writes, "that I did not 
discover in my youth that my theatre must be the ancient 
theatre that can be made by unrolling a carpet, or marking 
out a place with a stick, or setting a screen against a 
wall." When he was last in America he told us of such a 
theatre, so intimate that its few properties could be 
carried by the players in a taxicab and set in a drawing- 
room, and of how he had found a first model in the Noh 
stage of aristocratic Japan. Shortly afterward The Only 
Jealousy of Emer was published in Poetry; and now, 
with three other plays similar in construction, it appears 
in book form. There are also masks and costume plates 
by Edmond Dulac for At the Hawk^s Well^ produced as 
early as 1916 in England, music for the dances and songs 
by W. M. Rummel, and suggestive notes on the plays and 
their production. 

Unhesitatingly one may call this book the most signifi- 

cant contribution to the art-theatre that has been written 
in a long while. True, it is the art-theatre in its most 
aristocratic phase; but the best in this art, as in another, 
must sometimes, in relation to audiences, be aristocratic. 
What gives to these plays their significance, apart from 
the almost ineffable beauty with which at least two of 
them are written, is that he has found a way by which the 
color, the enchantment, the distance and subtlety of 
legendary drama may be projected intimately and by a 
medium of amazing simplicity. In doing this, granting 
that one's insight into the effect of the plays in production 
is accurate, he has conquered difficulties which would 
seem insurmountable. 

He has secured the illusion of distance, not in despite 
of, but through^ the intimacy of a small audience in contact 
with the players. Never before in the western theatre, 
and in no other western art except perhaps that of the 
story-teller setting his tale directly in the imagination, has 
such an effect been possible. It is the quality of his tech- 
nique, the unerring sense of the theatre, which seems to 
make this an authentic form both in these individual 
plays and as existing apart from them. Beside it the arti- 
ficial intimacy effected by Max Reinhardt becomes clap- 
trap. Restricting himself to the simplest means, he has 
chosen them with the instinct of a poet, with that same 
instinct which made such lines as these of the Musician: 
I call to the eye of the mind 
A well long choked up and dry. 
And boughs long stripped by the wind. 


Mr. Yeats' Plays 

And I call to the mind's eye 

Pallor of an ivory face. 

Its lofty dissolute air, 

A man climbing up to a place 

The salt sea wind has swept bare. 

"In literature if we would not be parvenus we must have 
a model;" and as his theatre has been modified until it 
has become independent of the Nohy so a new poetic 
drama may be liberated by his inspiration. 

As for the plays in relation to each other, we have 
learned long since to expect in the work of Mr. Yeats 
the clarity and beauty of poetic content and expression 
that one finds in these plays. We expect it; and it seldom 
fails the anticipation. If The Dreaming of the Bones and 
Calvary do not seem quite to reach the height of the 
two others, that is not to deny that they are rich in con- 
tent also. But there is a beauty lacking in them, purity 
of inspiration replaced by what is not far from propa- 
ganda in the one and from an over-subtle interpretation 
in the other. The mood has flagged somewhat, after the 
splendor of utterance in At the Hawk's Well and The 
Only Jealousy of Enter. These are incomparable. 

Postcript—to ''Little Theatres'": These plays, when 
you read them, may not appear diflicult to present, what 
with the elaborate stage directions and the photographs. 
But I fear that you would find them impossible, lacking 
a Yeats, a Dulac, and a Michio Itow, who are indispen- 
sable. And it would be a mistake to confuse this theatre 

in any way with the theatre of Jacques G>peau, which is 
also admirable. Mr. Yeats has not abandoned the mise 
en scene — he has intensified it. And, incidentally, he has 
given us, when we are ready for it, one kind of synthetic 
theatre, including even the management of light. 

Cloy d Head 

NOTES 

Wang Wei, the famous poet-painter who lived in China thirteen 
centuries ago, interests Mr. Bynner more than any other Chinese poet, 
and is sufficiently introduced by his editorial. For nearly three years 
the two translators have been studying Chinese poetry of the great 
age for the benefit of readers of English, and their book of translations. 
The Jade Mountain^ is to be published next autumn by Alfred A. Knopf. 

Kiang Kang-hu, who is a scholar in both languages, made the literal 
English versions which Mr. Bynner, after close consultation over mean- 
ings and rhythms, has shaped into English poems. 

Eunice Tietjens (Mrs. Cloyd Head) of Chicago, who is a member of 
Poetry's advisory committee, is the author of two books of verse — 
Profiles from China and Body and Raimeni (Alfred A. KnopO. 


Canopic Jar (E. P. Dutton & Co.). Abrigada is not a castle in Spain, 
but an old house in Long Island where the Speyers lived last summer. 

Miss Constance Lindsay Skinner, of New York, received, in 191 5, 
one of Poetry's prizes for her group of Indian poems, Songs of the 
Coast-dwellers, She has not yet printed a volume of her Indian inter- 
pretations, but many of them may be found in George W. Cronyn's 
anthology, The Path on the Rainhow (Boni & Liveright). 

Mr. Harold Monro, of London, author of three or four books of verse 
and editor of The Chap Book, will publish this spring, through the Poetry 
Bcok Shop, of which he is chief, a new book of poems. Real Property. 

Babette Deutach (Mrs. A. Yarmolinsky), of New York, is the author 
o( Banners (George H. Doran Co.). Mr. and Mrs. Yarmolinsky together 
translated from the Russian The Twehe, by the late Alexander Blok^ 


Notes 

which was published in 1920 by B. W. Huebsch, with an introduction 
by the translators; and they have just issued, through Harcourt, Brace 
& Co., Modem Russian Poetry: An Anihology, 

"Paul Tanaquil" is a cosmopolite resident of Coronado, Cal. 

The other poets in this number are new to our readers: 

Medora C. Addison (Mrs. Charles Read Nutter), of Concord, Mass., 
wiU soon publish, through the Yale Uniy. Press, her first book of verse. 
Dreams and a Sword, 

Mr. F. R. McCreary is a young poet of Cambridge, Mass. Miss 
Gwendolen Haste, a native of Illinois, is now in business in New York. 
Miss Sarah-Margaret Brown is a student at Northwestern University, 
Evanston, 111. 

Mr. H. Austin Simons, or "Hi Simons," as he prefers to be called, 
was imprisoned for eighteen months as a conscientious objector at Fort 
Leavenworth, and since his release has been doing newspaper work 
in Chicago. 

All trace of Mr. Harlow Clarke, except his poems, has disappeared 
from this office — we shall be grateful for a word from him. 

BOOKS RECEIVED 

ORIGINAL verse: 

Dreams Out of Darkness^ by Jean Starr Untermeyer. B. W. Huebsch. 

Explorations^ by Robert McAlmon. Egoist Press, London. 

Hymeny by H. D. Henry Holt & Co. 

Cobblestones^ by David Sentner. Alfred A. Knopf. 

Poems: Second Series, by J. C. Squire. George H. Doran Co. 

The Secret Way, by Zona Gale. Macmillan Co. 

A Web of Thoughts, by Marjorie Anderson. Four Seas Co. 

With Star and Grass, by Anna Spencer Twitchell. Comhill Co. 

Mystic Songs 0/ Fire and Flame, by K. Arthur-Behenna. Cornhill Co. 

Tree-top Mornings, by Ethelwyn Wetherald. Comhill Co. 

Mid Light and Shade, by John Langdon Jones. Duffield & Co. 

Anita and Other Poems, by Evarts Scudder. Basil Blackwell, Oxford. 

Eternal Helen, by F. Pearce Sturm. Basil Blackwell. 

The Traveller's Tale, by Clifford Bax. Basil Blackwell. 

Through a Glass, by Fanny DeGroot Hastings. Priv. ptd.. New York. 

Shadings^ by Bessie Glen Buchanan. Privately printed. 

The Birth if the PoinsettUy by Francis A. W. Kendall. Priv. ptd. 

Irish and Canadian Poems, by Michael A. Hargadon. Modern Printing 

Co., Montreal. 
Pjesme, by Vladislav S. Pa vie. Stamparija J. A. Omero Press, N. Y. 
Igdrasil, by Royall Snow. Four Seas Co. 
The Playground of the Gods and Other Poems, by Elizabeth Huntingdon. 

Four Seas Co. 
Missouri and Other Verse, by Nathaniel M. Baskett, M. D. Privately 

printed, Canton, Mo. 
Legends of Life and Other Poems, by Bertha Oppenheim. Stratford Co. 
Mavericks, by William A. Brewer, Jr. Priv. ptd., Berkeley, Cal. 

plays: 
Plays of Edmond Rostand, Translated by Henderson Daingeriield 

Norman; illustrated by Ivan Glidden. (2 Vols.) Macmillan Co. 
Aria Da Capo, by Edna St. Vincent MiUay. Mitchell Kennerley. 

ANTHOLOGIES AND TRANSLATIONS: 

Modem Russian Poetry, chosen and translated by Babette Deutsch and 

Avrahm Yarmolinsky. Harcourt, Brace & Co. 
Die neue JVelt, eine Anthologie juengster Amerikanischer Lyric, heraus- 

gegeben von Claire Coll. S. Fischer, Berlin. 
Fir-flower Tablets. Translated from the Chinese by Florence Ayscoogh; 

English versions by Amy Lowell. Houghton Mifflin Co. 
Some Contemporary Poets — ig20, by Harold Monro. Leonard Parsons, 

London. 
prose: 
The Golden Fleece and the Heroes Who Lived Before Achilles, by Padraic 

Colum. lUustrations by Willy Pogany. Macmillan Co. 
A Hasty Bunch, by Robert McAlmon. Priv. ptd., Dijon, France. 
A Mother* s First Prayer, by Kathryn Wire Hammond. Abingdon Press, 

New York. 
The Poetic Procession, by J. F. Roxburgh. Basil Blackwell, Oxford. 
The Beginning rf Wisdom, by Stephen Vincent Benet. Henry Holt & Co. 
Gray Wolf Stories — Indian Mystery Tales cf Coyotes, Animals and Men, 

by Bernard Sexton. Illus. by Gwenyth Waugh. Macmillan Co. 
Browningiana in Baylor University, compiled by Aurelia E. Brooks. 

Baylor University Press, Waco, Texas. 


Are You a Connoisseur of Art? 

Keep up with the times— read POETRY 



The New York Sunday Tribune of Jan. 0h, ig2i, said edUoriaUy, 
m quoting seven poems from our January number: 

**Thc varied interest and beauty presented are typical of 
Poetry's quality. Thanks to a rare coincidence of poise and gener- 
ous imagination, of sense and sensitiveness, it ranks asr easfly the best 
vehicle of poetry in the English language." 

In the London Times of Nov, 2Sth, 1920, we read: 

«We need not linger over the many English and French con- 
tributors to this periodical. . . We do have to note that it has 
published, as it honestly claims, much of the best experimental 
poetry written by Americans in the past eight years. . . They have 
succeeded in their primary design— te create a poetry which should 
be American in thought, feeling, subject, and form. That is, after 
all, a distinct achievement.** 

The Chicago Evening Post, in commenting on POETRY'S eighth 
birthday, said: 

''No editorship is infallible, but it is rather interesting and 
enlightening to look over the old numbers of Poetry and to realize 
that the first important diance for publication in America was given 
to many poets, almost unknown, who have since obtained fome. . . 
We wonder how many more may yet be helped. Poetry is, so far 
as we know, unique in the length of its life, recognized position and 
rigorously artistic standard." 



POETRY, 543 Cass Street, Chicago 

Enclosed find I3.00 (Canada, I3.15; foreign, I3.25) for one 
year's subscription to Poetry: 

Beginning 

Name 

Address 



 



A HEALTH FACTOR 
IN MANY HOMES 

"Horlick's" 

the Original 
Malted Milk 

Delicious and inviKorating food-drink that improves 
the nutrition of M ages. 

Serve at meals and to refresh whenever fatisued or 
hungry during the day. Avoid imitstioni it the iovntaia. 

imnni R ITS fficon OF WEE H w A cERnm 



MISS HARRIET MONROE 

who has studied the poetry movement 
in all its phases, will consider engage- 
ments for a lecture trip east, west or 
south in February and March, 1922; or 
for other dates nearer Chicago. 

For terms, dates and other details 
please address 

POETRY 

543 Can Street, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 



 



,Mft«.^ 2 1922, 



Vol. XIX 



No. Vt 




A Magazine of Verse 
Edited by Harriet Monroe 



March 1922 



Medley of Poems 

by Carl Sandburg 
Monologue from a Mattress 

by Louis Untermeye! 
Marion Strobel, Ruth Harwooc 

Morris Bishop 



543 Cass Street, Chicago 



$3.00 per Year 



Sintfle Numbers 25c 




 



How I wish that some English paper had anything like the authentic vitality of 
PoBTRYl Louis GoUing 



Vol. XIX No. VI 

POETRY/or MARCH, 1922 

PAGE 

Medley of Poems Carl Sandhurg 295 

Moon-riders I-III— Feather Lights— The Naked Stranger— 
Medlcjr^-Gypsy Mother 

Song Sketches Marion Strobel 303 

We Have a Day — Spring Morning — ^Tonight — ^The Silence 
Stirs Agwn— The Night — I Would Pretend — ^Admonition — 
Frightened Face — Daily Prayer — L'Envoi 

Working-hour Songs RuihHarwood 310 

The Shoe Fattory— Making Little Clothes— Always and 
Always 

The Unloved Alison Buchanan 313 

Ecdesiastes — ^A New Hampshire Boy . . . Morris Bishop 314 

Roads Sarah Unna 316 

Holiday Crowd— Winged Victory Hortcnse FUxner 317 

Monologue from a Mattress Louis Untermeyer 318 

Newspaper Verse H.M. 324 

Reviews: 

Miss Lowell's Legends Dorothy Dudley 330 

Spear-shaft and Cyclamen-flower .... /F. Bryher ^^3 

"A Distinguished Young Man" Yoor fFinters 337 


A Lute of One String H.M, ^^ 

A Poet in Embryo \ H.M. 34$ 

Rhetoric Unashamed H,M. 346 

Correspondence : 

The Code of Minority Baker Brownell 347 

A New Poetry Society F. P. 351 

Notes and Books Received 351, 35a 

Mannacriptt mutt be accompanied by a stamped and self-addressed envelope. 

Indtitive yearly subscriptbn rates. In the United States. Mexico. Cuba and 
American possessions. $3.00 net; in Canada. $3.15 net; in all other countries in the 
Pbftal Union, $3.25 net. Entered as second-class matter Nov. 15. 1912. at the 
post-oflioe, at Chicago, HI., under Act of March 3. 1879. 

Published monthly at 543 Cass St., Chicago, 111. 

Copyrithi 1922, by Harri€i,Monro€. AU rithts restrved. 



 



Poetry asks its friends to become 
Supporting Subscribers by paying 
ten dollars a year to its Fund. The 
art of poetry requires, if it is to 
advance, not only special sympathy 
from a discriminating public, but 
also endowment similar to that 
readily granted to the other arts. 
All who believe in the general pur- 
pose and policy of this magazine, 
and recognize the need and value 
of such an organ of the art, are in- 
vited to assist thus tn maintaining 
iu 



 




AMagazine of Vase 



MARCH 1922 



MEDLEY OF POEMS 

MOON-RIDERS 

I 

WHAT have I saved out of a morning? 
The earliest of the morning came with moon-mist 
And the travel of a moon-spilt purple: 
Bars, horse-shoes, Texas long-horns. 
Linked in night silver. 
Linked under leaves in moonlit silver. 
Linked in rags and patches 
Out of the ice-houses of the morning moon. 
Yes, this was the earliest — 
Before the cowpunchers on the eastern rims 
Began riding into the sun, 
Riding the roan mustangs of morning, 

Roping the mavericks after the latest stars. 
What have I saved out of a morning? 
Was there a child face I saw once 
Smiling up a stairway of the morning moon? 

II 

"It is time for work/' said a man in the morning. 
He opened the faces of the clocks, saw their works. 
Saw the wheels oiled and fitted, running smooth. 
"It is time to begin a day's work," he s^d again. 
Watching a bullfinch hop on the rain-worn boards 
Of a beaten fence counting its bitter winters. 
The clinging feet of the bullfinch and the flash 
Of its flying feathers as it flipped away 
Took his eyes away from the clocks — his flying eyes. 
He walked over, stood in front of the clocks again. 
And said, "I'm sorry; I apologize forty ways." 

Ill 

The morning paper lay bundled. 

Like a spear in a museum, 

Across the broken sleeping-room 

Of a moon-sheet spider. 

The spinning work of the morning spider's feet 

Left off where the morning paper's pages lay 

In the shine of the web in the summer-dew grass. 

The man opened the morning paper: saw the first page, 


Carl Sandburg 

The back page, the inside pages, the editorials; 

Saw the world go by, eating, stealing, fighting; 

Saw the headlines, date-lines, funnies, ads. 

The marching movies of the workmen going to work, the 

workmen striking. 
The workmen asking jobs — five million pairs of eyes look 

for a boss and say, "Take me*'\ 
People eating with too much to eat, people eating with 

nothing in sight to eat tomorrow, eating as though 

eating belongs where people belong. 

"Hustle, you hustlers, while the bustling's good," 
Said the man, turning the morning paper's pages. 
Turning among headlines, date-lines, funnies, ads. 
"Hustlers carrying the banner," said the man. 
Dropping the paper and beginning to hunt the city; 
Hunting the alleys, boulevards, back-door by-ways; 
Hunting till he found a blind horse dying alone. 
Telling the horse, "Two legs or four legs — it's all the same 
with a work plug." 

A hayfield mist of evening saw him 
Watching the moon-riders lose th^ moon 
For new shooting-stars. He asked, 
"Christ, what have I saved out of a morning?" 
He called up a stairway of the morning moon 
And he remembered a child face smiling up that same 
stairway. 

FEATHER LIGHTS 

Macabre and golden the moon opened a slant of light. 

A triangle for an oriole to stand and sing, "Take me 
home." 

A layer of thin white gold feathers for a child queen of 
gypsies. 

So the moon opened a slant of light and let it go. 

So the lonesome dogs, the fog moon, the pearl mist, came 
back. 

THE NAKED STRANGER 

It is five months off. 
Knit, stitch, and hemstitch: 
Sheets, bags, towels, these are the offerings. 
When he is older, or she is a big girl. 
There may be flowers or ribbons or money 
For birthday offerings. Now, however. 
We must remember it is a naked stranger 
Coming to us; and the sheath of the arrival 
Is so soft we must be ready, and soft too. 

Knit, stitch, hemstitch, it is only five months. 



It would be easy to pick a lucky star for this baby 
If a choice of two stars lay before our eyes — 


Carl Sandhirg 



One a pearl-gold star and one pearl-silver — 
And the ofFer of a chance to pick a lucky star. 

When the high hour comes 

Let there be a light flurry of snow, 

A little zigzag of white spots 

Agunst the gray roofs. 
The snow*born all understand this as a luck-wish. 



MEDLEY 

Ignorance came in stones of gold; 
The ignorant slept while the hangmen 
Hanged the keepers of the lights 
Of sweet stars: such were the apothegms. 
Offhand offerings of mule-drivers 
Eating sandwiches of rye bread, 
Salami and onions. 

"Too Many Books," we always called him; 

A landscape of masterpieces and old favorites 

Fished with their titles for his eyes 

In the upstairs and downstairs rooms 

Of his house. Whenever he passed 

The old-time bar-room where Pete Morehouse 

Shot the chief of police, where 

The sponge squads shot two bootleggers, 

[299I 




 

He always remembered the verse story. 
The Face on the Bar-room Floor — 
, The tramp on a winter night. 
Saddened and warmed with whiskey, 
Telling of a woman he wanted 
And a woman who wanted him, 
How whiskey wrecked it all; 
Taking a piece of chalk. 
Picturing her face on the bar-room floor. 
Fixing the lines of her face 
While he told the story. 

Then gasping and falling with finished heartbeats. 
Dead. 

And whenever he passed over the bridge at night 

And took the look up the river to smaller bridges. 

Barge lights, and looming shores. 

He always thought of Edgar Allan Poe, 

With a load of hootch in him. 

Going to a party of respectable people 

Who called for a speech. 

Who listened to Poe recite the Lord's Prayer, 

Correctly, word for word, yet with lush, unmistakable 

Intonations, so haunting the dinner-party people 

All excused themselves to each other. 

Whenever Too Many Books 

Passed over the town bridge in the gloaming, 


Carl Sandburg 

He thought of Poe breaking up that party 

Of respectable people. Such was Too Many Books — 

We called him that. 



GYPSY MOTHER 

In a hole-in-a-wall on Halsted Street sits a gypsy woman^ 
In a garish, gas-lit rendezvous, in a humpback higgling 
hole-in-a-wall. 

The left hand is a tattler; stars and oaths and alphabets 
Commit themselves and tell happenings gone, happenings 
to come, pathways of honest people, hypocrites. 

"Long pointed fingers mean imagination;' a star on the 
third finger says a black shadow walks near.'' 

Cross the gypsy's hand with fifty cents, and she takes your 
left hand and reads how you shall be happy in love, 
or not, and whether you die rich, or not. 

Signs outside the hole-in-a-wall say so, misspell the 
promises, scrawl the superior gypsy mysteries. 

A red shawl on her shoulders falls with a fringe hem to a 

green skirt. 
Chains of yellow beads sweep from her neck to her tawny 

hands. 
Fifty springtimes must have kissed her mouth holding a 

calabash pipe. 

She pulls slow contemplative pufFs of smoke. She is a 
shape for ghosts of contemplation to sit around and 
ask why something cheap as happiness is here; and 
more besides than plain happiness, chapped lips, 
rough eyes, red shawl, gypsy perfection of offhand 
insolence. 

She is thinking about somebody and something — the same 
as Whistler's mother sat and thought about some- 
body and something. 

In a hole-in-a-wall on Halsted Street are stars, oaths, 
alphabets. 

Carl Sandburg 




SONG SKETCHES 

WE HAVE A DAY 

We have a day, we have a night 
Which have been made for our delight I 

Shall we run, and run, and run 
Up the path of the rising sun? 

Shall we roll down every hill, 

Or lie still 

Listening while the whispering leaves 

Promise what no one believes? 

(The hours poise, breathless for flight, and bright.) 

Only a night, only a day — 

We must not let them get away: 

Don a foolish cap and bell. 
For all is well and all is well! 

Dance through woods a purple-blue! 
Dance into 

Lanes that are a hidden stem 
Beneath the beauty over them. 

(The hours lift their shadow-form, are warm.) 
Why do you still stand mute and white? 
The day is past, but there is night. 

Turn your head, give me your lips — 
The darkness slips! The darkness slips. 

We could make it hushed and still. 
If you will 

We could hear, close to the ground 
Life — the one authentic sound. 

(The hours, as a startled faun, are gone.) 



SPRING MORNING 

O day — if I could cup my hands and drink of you. 

And make this shining wonder be 

A part of me! 

Oday! Oday! 

You lift and sway your colors on the sky 

Till I am crushed with beauty. Why is there 

More of reeling sunlit air 

Than I can breathe? Why is there sound 

In silence? Why is a singing wound 

About each hour? 

And perfurne when there is no flower? 

O day! O day! How may I press 

Nearer to loveliness? 


Marion Strobel 

TONIGHT 

A flame 
Leaps high 
In a wind: 

I am the same. 

I go 

My head 
High. I flame 

Red— blue. Oh, 

Tonight 
The sky 
Will be a 

Cry of light — 

Fire! 

G)me swift 
As wind — come, 

Lift me higher! 

THE SILENCE STIRS AGAIN 

The silence that has lain so long between us 

Stirs again: 

The rushes bend in shining pathways 

To the shining end; 

The air is burdened with the rose that is not there — 

Always the rose. 

I have no laughter now, no tears — 
Only the silence grows big with years, 
Only the silence has a touch 
That hurts overmuch. 

The rushes bend 

In shining pathways to the shining end; 

Bend, and close. 



THE NIGHT 

The night binds darkness round my eyes 

And makes me wise. 

The quiet hours beguile — 

Like m^dens chaste in single file, 

Like maidens who have said, 

"Be comforted." 

The truth of day falls far away 

And far away • . . 

And all the little gaieties 

Are dressed in colors as I please; 

And sadness has a gentle hand 

I understand. 

The night bound darkness round my eyes- 
I was made wise. 


Marion Strobei 



I WOULD PRETEND 



Now that between us there is nothing more 
To say, I would have loud and foolish speech 
With you, I would pretend I still adore 
Your voice: "Come, beautiful, draw near and teach 
The way my hands should go in a caress — 
Should fingers trail as pink feet of a crane 
That skim the water? — or should fingers press 
Their weight heavily?" Draw near me again — 
What docs it matter if the words you say 
Are lies, if they be sweet to listen to? 
Your lips are quite as cruel, quite as gay 
As ever; and your eyes are honest blue. . . . 
Oh, be sublimely false (who are not true) — 
And rU pretend I love you ... as I do! 



ADMONITION 

Come quietly, without a word — 
I am so tired of the things Fve heard. 
I am so tired of words that tear 
At beauty till the branch is bare: 

Of words that will not let beauty be 

A sweet-clustered mystery. 

As a Canterbury bell 

Purse your lips, but do not tell. 

FRIGHTENED FACE 

Child of the frightened face, 

Trying to understand 
Thelittleibitoflove 

Under your hand, 

Holding the little love 

Under fingers that crush 
That which is soft as the 

Throat of a thrush. 

Holding your hand upon 

The wonder of the thing, 
Crushing out the song that 

Wanted to sing: 

Child of the frightened face, 

Why do your fingers try 
To kill the little love? 

Soon it would die. 



DAILY PRAYER 

And at last when I go 
WiU it be so? 
Shall I find you behihd 
The rude platitude of death? 

t3o8] 



 



Marion Strobel 



I kneel within the certainty 

That you are near to me: 

Each day I pray 

That I may follow through 

To you. 

Each day I pray. 



L ENVOI 

The moments reach and touch the hours gently. 

Each is kind. 

Each is soothing as the tips 

Of fingers held to lips. 

The moments reach and touch the hours: flowers 
Wt1\ bloom, again, 

And I shall pick fresh jonquils for the room; 
And I shall pick fresh jonquils in the usual way 
Every day. 

The moments reach and touch the hours: 
Time has no beginning, and no end. 
Dear friend. 

Marion Strobel 


WORKING.HOUR SONGS 

THE SHOE FACTORY 

Song of the knotty er 

They told me 

When I came 
That this would be drudgery, 

Always the same 
Thing over and over 

Day after day — 
The same swift movement 

In the same small way. 

Pick upy 
Place, 
Push, 
And ifs tied. 
Take off. 
Cut, 
And put 
It aside. 

Over and over 

In rhythmical beat — 
Some say it is drudgery 

But to me it is sweet. 


Ruth Harwood 



Pick upy 
Place, 
Push, 
And it's tied. 
Outdoors 
The sky 
Is so blue 
And so wide! 

It's a joyous song 
Going steadily on, 

Marching in measures 
Till the day is gone. 

Pick upy 
Place, 
Push, 
And it's tied. 
Soon end 
Of day 
Will bring him 
To my side. 

Oh, I love the measures 

Singing so fast. 
Speeding happy hours 

Till he comes at last! 

MAKING LITTLE CLOTHES 

Grey rain on the window-pane> 
And in my heart grey rain — 

And the ceaseless whir of machines 
Pounding my weary brain. 

He had such a little share of life^ 

And now he*s gone. 
And all my heart went with him. 

Yet I go numbly on^ 
Making little clothes 

Just the size of him^ 
Little clothes for others 

But nevermore for him. 

Grey rain on the window-pane, 
And in my heart grey rain — 

And the endless grind of machines 
Beating a dull refrain. 

ALWAYS AND ALWAYS 

Always and always 

I go out from myself 

In the silver morning, 

Out to greet some new friend, 

With my arms laden with friendship gifts 

And a hundred little songs of gladness on my lips. 


Ruth Hartvood 

Always and always 

I return to myself 

In the purple twilight — 

Back to the comforting sureness of myself. 

To fill my empty arms again with gifts, 

To ease the little hurt my heart has brought. 

Ruth Harwood 



THE UNLOVED 

Stephen, son of me. 

You will never be born, my dear. 
Light of day you will never see. 

And the earth-sounds never hear. 

But after I have died. 

When I come to the courts of the sun — 
Though husband-love I have never had. 

And lovers never a one — 

You will stand with a ripple of joy 
On the lips that have never smiled. 

And I shall clasp, my son at last — 
My child, my child! 

Alison Buchanan 


ECCLESIASTES 

In the smoke-blue cabaret 

She sang some comic thing: 
I heeded not at all 

TiU "Sing!" she cried, "Sing!" 
So I sang in tune with her 

The only song I know: 
"The doors shall be shut in the streets, 

And the daughters of music brought low.' 

Her eyes and working lips 

Gleamed through the cruddled air — 
I tried to sing with her 

Her song of devil-may-care. 
But in the shouted chorus 

My lips would not be stilled: 
"The rivers run into the sea. 

Yet the sea is not filled." 

Then one came to my table 

Who said, with a laughing glance, 
"If that is the way you sing, 

Why don't you learn to dance?" 
But I said: "With this one song 

My heart and lips are cumbered — 
'The crooked cannot be made straight. 

Nor that which is wanting, numbered.* 


Morris Bishop 



"This song must I sing, 

Whatever else I covet — 
Hear the end of my song, 

Hear the beginning of it: 
'More bitter than death the woman 

(Beside me still she stands) 
Whose heart is snares and nets, 

And whose hands are bands.'" 



A NEW HAMPSHIRE BOY 

Under Monadnock, 

Fold on fold. 
The world's fat kingdoms 

Lie unrolled. 

Far in the blue south 
City-smoke, swirled, 

Marks the dwellings 
Of the kings of the world. 

Old kings and broken. 

Soon to die. 
Once you had little, 

As little as I. 

Smoke of the city, 
Blow in my eyes — 

[31S] 




 

.Blind me a little, 
Make me wise. 

Dust of the city. 

Blow and gust — 
Make me, like all men, 

Color of dust. 

I stand on Monadnock, 

And seem to see 
Brown and purple kingdoms 

Offered to me. 

Morris Bishop 



ROADS 

You who have made the ancient road of turf, 

That my feet might pass over it 

Into the level evening — 

Make now the ancient road of tears 

That my song may pass over it; 

Make the ancient road of song 

That my ghost may pass over it. 

Coming with the new earth. 

Sarah Unna 



[316I 



 



HOLIDAY CROWD 

They do not know they wear their wounds so plain, 

These covered bodies swathed in cloth and fur. 

They do not dream they hold their naked pain 

Before this show of life — the checkered stir 

Here in the wintry sunlight on the street. 

And yet, like martyrs on an old church wall, 

They point their wounds — their bleeding hands and feet, 

The aching scars, and lips that drank the gall. 

For life has hurt them, though they will not cry 

"Enough"; shaped flesh to hunger quick or dead. 

Withered them, harried, twisted bones awry. 

And bleached them white beneath their flying red. 

Strange skeletons in merry dominoes. 

They do not dream how plain the outline shows. 

WINGED VICTORY 

Your flimsy dress. 

Out of a bargain basement, 

Reacts to the wind 

As the living draperies 

Of the Victory of Samothrace. 

Your body also is proudly revealed. 

Cleaving the air as hers. 

And, verily, you would do as well 

Wthout a head. „ . ft 

Hortense Flexner 

MONOLOGUE FROM A MATTRESS 

Heinrich Heine^ aeiat^dy loquitur: 

Can that be you, La Mouche? Wait till I lift 

This palsied eyelid and make sure. . . . Ah, true. 

Come in, dear fly, and pardon my delay 

In thus existing; I can promise you 

Next time you come you'll find no dying poet! 

Without sufiicient spleen to see me through. 

The joke becomes too tedious a jest. 

I am afraid my mind is dull today; 

I have that — something — heavier on my chest, 

And then, you see, Fve been exchanging thoughts 

With Doctor Franz. He talked of Kant and Hegel 

As though he'd nursed them both through whooping-cough ; 

And, as he left, he let his finger shake 

Too playfully, as though to say, "Now off 

With that long face — you've years and years to live." 

I think he thinks so. But, for Heaven's sake. 

Don't credit it — and never tell Mathilde. 

Poor dear, she has enough to bear already . . . 

This was a month! During my lonely weeks 

One person actually climbed the stairs 

To seek a cripple. It was Berlioz — 

But Berlioz always was original. 

Come here, my lotus-flower. It is best 

I drop the mask today; the half-cracked shield 



 



Louis Untermeyer 



Of mockery calls for younger hands to wield. 
Laugh — or I'll hug it closer to my breast! 
So ... I can be as mawkish as I choose 
And give my thoughts an airing, let them loose 
For one last rambling stroll before — ^Now look! 
Why tears? — you never heard me say "the end". 
Before . . . before I dsip them in a book 
And so get rid of them once and for all. 
This is their holiday — we'll let them run — 
Some have escaped already. There goes one . . 
What, I have often mused, did Goethe mean? 
So many years ago, at Weimar, Goethe said, 
"Heine has all the poet's gifts but love." 
Good God! — but that is all I ever had. 
More than enough! — so much of love to give 
That no one gave me any in return. 
And so I flashed and snapped in my own fires 
Until I stood, with nothing left to burn, 
A twisted trunk, in chilly isolation. 
Ein Fichtenbaum steht einsam — you recall ? 
I was that northern tree and, in the South, 
Amalia. ... So I turned to scornful cries, 
Hot iron songs to save the rest of me: 
Plunging the brand in my own misery. 
Crouching behind my pointed wall of words — 
Ramparts I built of moons and loreleys. 
Enchanted roses, sphinxes, love-sick birds. 
Giants^ dead lads who left their graves to dance, 

Fairies and phoenixes and friendly gods 

A curious frieze> half renaissance, half Greek, 
Behind which, in revulsion from romance, 
I lay and laughed — and wept — till I was weak. 
Words were my shelter, words my one escape, 
Words were my weapons against everything. 
Was I not once the son of Revolution? — 
Give me the lyre, I said, and let me sing 
My song of battle: words like flaming stars 
Shot down with power to burn the palaces; 
Words like bright javelins to fly with fierce 
Hate of the oily philistines, and glide 
Through all the seven heavens till they pierce 
The pious hypocrites who dare to creep 
Into the Holy Places. "Then," I cried, 
"I am a fire to rend and roar and leap; 
I am all joy and song, all sword and flame!" 
H'm — you observe me passionate. I aim 
To curb these wild emotions lest they soar 
Or drive against my will. (So I have said 
These many years — and still they are not tame.) 
Scraps of a song keep rumbling in my head . . . 
Listen — you never heard me sing before. 

When a false world betrays your trust 
And stamps upon your fire ^ 

When what seemed blood is only rusty 
Take up the lyre! 


Louis Untermeyer 



How quicUy the heroic mood 
Responds to its own ringing; 

The scornful hearty the angry blood 
Leap upwardy singing! 

Ah, that was how it used to be. But now, 

Du sch^ner Todesengel^ it is odd 

How more than calm I am. Franz said he knew 

It was religion, and it is, perhaps; 

Religion — or morphine — or poultices — God knows. 

I sometimes have a sentimental lapse 

And long for sapors and a physical God. 

When health is all used up, when money goes. 

When courage cracks and leaves a shattered will, 

Christianity begins. For a sick Jew 

It is a very good religion. . . . Still 

I fear that I shall die as I have lived, 

A long-nosed heathen playing with his scars; 

A pagan killed by Weltschmerz. ... I remember. 

Once when I stood with Hegel at a window, 

I, being full of bubbling youth and co£Fee, 

Spoke in symbolic tropes about the stars. 

Something I said about " those high 

Abodes of the blest'' provoked his temper. 

"Abodes? the stars?" — he froze me with a sneer; 

"A light eruption on the firmament." 

"But," cried romantic I, "is there no sphere 

Where virtue is rewarded when we die?" 

[321I 




 

And Hegel mocked: "A very pleasant whim — 

So you demand a bonus since you spent 

One lifetime and refrained from poisoning 

Your testy grandmother!" . . . How much of him 

Remains in me — even when I am caught 

In dreams of death and immortality! 

To be eternal — what a brilliant thought! 

It must have been conceived and coddled first 

By some old shopkeeper in Nuremberg, 

His slippers warm, his children amply nursed. 

Who, with his lighted meerschaum in his hand, 

His nightcap on his head, one summer night 

Sat drowsing at his door; and mused: ^^How grand 

If all of this could last beyond a doubt-r- 

This placid moon, this plump gemuthlichkeit; 

Pipe, breath and summer never going out — 

To vegetate through all eternity. ..." 

But no such everlastingness for me! — 

God, if he can, keep me from such a blight. 

Deathy it is but the long cool nighty 
And lifers a sad and sultry day. 
It darkens; I prow sleepy; 

I am weary of the light. 

Over my bed a strange tree gleamSy 
And there a nightingale is loud 


Louis Untermeyer 



She sings of lovCy love only 
I hear i/, even in dreams. 



My Mouche, the other day as I lay here> 

Slightly propped up upon this mattress-grave 

In which I've been interred these few eight years, 

I saw a dog, a little pampered slave. 

Running about and barking. I would have given 

Heaven could I have been that dog; to thrive 

Like him, so senseless — and so much alive! 

And once I called myself a blithe Hellene, 

Who am too much in love with life to live. 

The shrug is pure Hebraic ... for what I've been, 

A lenient Lord will tax me — and forgive. 

Dieu me pardonnera — c*est son metier. 

But this is jesting. There are other scandals 

You haven't heard. . . • Can it be dusk so soon? — 

Or is this deeper darkness . . . ? Is that you. 

Mother? — how did you come? And are those candles 

There on that tree whose golden arms are filled? — 

Or are they birds whose white notes glimmer through 

The seven branches now that all is stilled? 

What — Friday night again and all my songs 

Forgotten? Wait ... I still can sing — 

Sh^ma Yisroel Adonai Elohenu^ 

Adonai Echod ... 

Mouche — Mathilde ... 

Louis Untermeyer 
COMMENT 

NEWSPAPER VERSE 

A RECENT editorial in the Washington Herald 
begins with the following paragraph: 

Literary editors of newspapers know that some of the best vene 
brought out in America first sees the light of day in the columns of the 
press. Morocco binding and hand-drawn initials don't insure ex- 
cellence^ nor have the higher-class magazines any monopoly on truly 
good poetry. 

And corroborative evidence is offered from the Atlanta 
Constitution f which says: 

Some of the best poetry written in this country today appears first 
in the columns of the daily or weeidy press. The literary magazines 
have never had a monopoly of it — and they never will. 

In discussing newspaper verse it is hardly fair to 
include the "weekly press"; for our only purely literary 
reviews, or reviews largely devoted to current literature — 
such papers as The Literary Review of the New York 
Evening Posty The Nation, The New Republic y The Freemany 
the New York Times Magazine — are weeklies, and as a 
rule they are much more progressively edited, so far as 
modern poetry is concerned, than most of the monthlies. 
Reedy" s Mirror, for example, under the editorship of a 
remarkable man, was a much more *' literary magazine" 
in its day than The Century y Harper* Sy Scriiner*Sy or any 
other alleged "higher-class magazine"; and it had 
more "discoveries" to its credit, in both verse and prose, 


Newspaper Verse 

than all these New York respectables combined. In fact, 
the weeklies have been more hospitable to modern poets, 
to "the new movement," than any of the monthlies 
except The Dialy The Masses with its successor The 
Liberator J and the magazines which, like Poetry, are the 
special organs of the art. 

Therefore we shall confine our part of the present 
discussion to newspaper verse, to those "colyumists" and 
other poets — and poetasters — who have got their start, 
and won their fame, through broad-cast publication in 
the daily papers. On this basis let us inquire whether 
"some of the best verse" is thus introduced. 

The best light verse — yes, unquestionably. The wit- 
tily rhyming commentator on life and letters, appearing 
from day to day in Sharps and Flats y A Line o* Type or 
Twoy The Conning Tower, The Periscope, and other 
columns less familiar to this editor, has added to our 
literature masterpieces in this kind. Eugene Field 
began it with poems like The Bibliomaniac* s Prayer and 
The Truth about Horace, each of which started a fashion. 
Bert Leston . Taylor continued it with such incisive 
satires as In the Gallery and The Kaiser's Farewell to 
Prince Henry. And more recent Chicago philosophers 
are living up to the tradition. Who could show a nimbler 
wit or a keener critical insight than Keith Preston in 
many poems now reprinted from The Periscope in his 
new book, Splinters? — for example, this one, entitled 
Effervescence and Evanescence: 

We've found this Scott Fitzgerald chap 

A chipper, charming child; 

He's uught us how the flappers flap. 

And why the whipper-snappers snap. 

What makes the women wild. 

But now he should make haste to trap 

The ducats in his dipper — 

The birds that put him on the map 

Will shortly all be^ to rap 

And flop to something flipper. 

And if Mr. Preston wields a rapier, listen to the blows 
of Guy Lee's bludgeon — in honor of that noble animal, 
the frog, who has to keep his mouth shut in order to 
breathe. We quote from a Chicago Tribune of recent 
date: 

When I hear the politician spouting hot lur by the ton, 
When I note the silly twaddle of the genus Native Son, 
When I'm sentenced to a banquet where a war of words ensues, 
When a socialist gets near me and begins to shout his views. 
When a bore essays a story that has neither point nor end. 
When a highbrow author's ego by his voice starts to extend. 
When a woman with a gnevance (or without one) launches out 
On a marathon of language o'er the conversation route, 
I ponder on this habit of mankind to squeak and squawk 
In a never..ending serial of talk and talk and talk; 
And I figger, as we flounder in the vocalistic bog. 
It's a pity human beings are not fashioned like the frog! 

Such humor as these things from our newspaper poets 
is straight American stuff, expressive of our kind of smiling 
common-sense, our special good-natured chuckle, over the 
piffle and burble, the mawkishness and pretense which 
encumber our every-day life. Such wit from the colyum- 

[3^6] 



 



Newspaper Verse 

ists is a shaft of sunlight on the breakfast-table-^-it clears 
the air and gleams on the sharpened edge of the mind. 

But what about the more serious verse of the newspaper 
poets? To be sure, Eugene Field's finest poems — such as 
Little Boy Blue and fVynkeity Blynken and Nod — first saw 
the light in his Sharps and Flats; Frank Stanton achieved 
one now and then in Atlanta; and a few slyly delicate 
poems by Bert Taylor adorned the Line. But the 
successors of these men have been less inclined to favor 
the unsmiling muse, or she to favor them; and the song- 
sters they admit to their columns are usually about as 
adventurously lyric as a chirping sparrow. If ''some of 
the best verse first sees the light of day" in these columns 
of cheer, the present writer has missed it. Yet here may 
be found, as a rule, the best of the newspaper verse — at 
least these column sparrows are honest, and their saltily 
humorous environment keeps them from rot and reek. 

But what shall be said of certain other kinds of seriously 
intended newspaper verse — of the placid rhyming 
journalese of Walt Mason or the syndicated moralizings 
of Edgar Guest? The former may be harmless; his end- 
less reeling of facile observations has sometimes a faint 
trace of savor — the tireless crank is turned by a mild old 
busybody at least humanely observant. But the stickily 
sugary Mr. Guest is not only a blight but a menace. 
His molasses factory proves profitable in more ways than 
one; so, like other wide-awake business-men, he spreads 
its products over the land. Syndicated in hundreds of 

newspapers, crowded with platform engagements, this 
favorite of fortune, journeying to Denver, is met at the 
station by the whole Colorado legislature, adjourned in 
his honor and celebrating his greatness with a brass t^and. 
And the school-children of many cities are stimulated by 
his example toward the high rewards, financial and glory- 
coronal, of poesy. 

Let us examine Mr. Guest's style — here is a recent 
and typical example, entitled For the New Year: 

This I would like to be — braver and bolder, 

Just a bit wiser because I am older, 

Just a bit kinder to those I may meet, 

Just a bit manlier taking defeat. 

This for the New Year my wish and my plea: 

Lord, make a regular man out of me. 

This I would like to be— just a bit finer, 
More of a smiler and less of a whiner; 
Just a bit quicker to stretch out my hand 
Helping another who's struggling to stand. 
This is my prayer for the New Year to be: 
Lord, make a regular man out of me. 

This I would like to be— just a bit fairer, 
Just a bit better and just a bit squarer, 
Not quite so ready to censure and blame. 
Quicker to help every man in the game. 
Not quite so eager men's failings to see — 
Lord, make a regular man out of me. 

This I would like to be— just a bit truer. 
Less of the wisher and more of the doer; 
Broader and bigger, more willing to give, 
Living and helping my neighbor to live. 
This for the New Year my prayer and my plea: 
Lord, make a regular man out of me. 


Newspaper Verse 

What do those Colorado legislators think they find in 
such sermonizing twaddle as this? Poetry? — if such a 
fond allusion is possible, how do they define poetry? In 
what department of their minds do they receive its proud 
appeal? Wisdom? — if they are honoring a sage, what 
high truth is he telling them? To what clear heights is he 
leading their souls? Do they discover beauty in this 
cheap rattle of foot-rule rhymes, emotion in this sickish 
slobber of easy virtue? Is it this rhymester or them- 
selves they are stultifying when they offer him public 
homage, and thereby inform the rising generation that he 
is their ideal of a great man of letters? 

Mr. Guest is not the only one of his kind — alas! — but 
he is conspicuous and typical. These syndicated rhymers, 
like the movie-producers, are learning that "it pays to 
be good," that one "gets by by giving the people the 
emotions of virtue, simplicity and goodness, with this 
program paying at the box-office." And it pays very well. 

B. L. T. hit off the situation a decade or more ago, 
saying: 

Lives of poets oft remind us 

Not to wait too long for time, 
But, departing, leave behind us 
Obvious facts embalmed in rhyme. 

Poems that we have to ponder 

Turn us prematurely gray; 
We are infinitely fonder 

Of the simple heartfelt lay. 

Whitman's Leaves of Grass is odious. 
Browning's Ring and Book a bore. 



Bleat, ye bards, in lines melodious. 
Bleat that two and two is four! 

Today he might have added: 

Bleat, ye bards, of home and mother, 

Pray to be a regular man. 
Treacle mixed with tears is golden — 

Pile the shekels while you can. 

Let the newspaper poets be true to the muse of laughter. 
We need their salt in our daily food> lest the maudlin 
adulterations of pseudo-literary profiteers poison our 
in'ards! H. M. 

REVIEWS 

MISS Lowell's legends 

Legendsy by Amy Lowell. Houghton Mifflin Co. 

Too many legends are getting lost and forgotten. To 
tell any of them over again and save them from the dust 
and ashes of the dead is a good thing; but even better to 
tell them so people will listen. To most of Miss Amy 
Lowell's Legends it is not easy to listen intently — they 
are too crowded with adjectives, with ornament, with 
imagery; they are obese with adornment. So they do not 
cut into you the way even the bare outline of a story may 
do in some textbook of mythology, or the way voices of a 
legendary day sometimes still reach you through old men 
and old women bridging two epochs. 


Miss LowclTs Legends 

In Legends Miss Lowell has sought alliance with Aztec, 
Cantonese, Indian, and English; but has not, it seems, 
become one with any of them. Their grief is not her 
grief, their passion not her passion. At their feasts and 
funerals she revels more like a tourist in the surprises of 
intricate ancient rites. She lays no claim, it is true, to 
accuracy; she has ''changed, added, subtracted, jumbled 
several stories together," she says, "at will to suit her 
particular vision." But she has not made them over with 
a vision acute enough to equal the origin of primitive lore. 
She has not made them with an economy of means that 
comes of violence. 

As a vendor of foreign goods she resorts to selling-talk, 
with sometimes the taint of a conflicting code of morals 
or manners upon it. So in the Aztec story of a fox 
assaulting the moon, the print of a fox's paws on the disc 
of the moon is labeled as "obscene." She labels these 
characters, the fox and the moon, instead of making them 
sheerly exist. 

It is a pity, the way this book has of calling things by 
so many names that they cease to be named at all. One 
is aware of passing by almost with indifference succinct, 
polished song and picture which in more spare surround- 
ings might make an instant appeal, a quick thrust. This 
passage for one: 

A stream flowed in a sunwise turn across the prairie, and the name of 
the stream was Burnt Water, because it tasted dark like smoke. 
The prairie ran out tongues of raw colors — blue of camass, red of 
geranium, yellow of parsley — ^at the young green grass. The prairie 

flung up its larks on a string of sunshine, it lay like a catching-sheet 
beneath the black breasts balancing down on a wind, calling, "See 
it! See it!" in little round voices. 

If you consider each legend in the book as a unit of art, 

it is easy to remember only the two last poems — Before 

the Storm and Four Sides to a House. One of these is New 

England legend; the other, not labeled, seems as real and 

as native to Miss Lowell. The ghosts of a man and child 

driving a high yellow chaise and a white horse before 

wind and rain, unwind, as the wheels whirl, a keen 

impetuous movie of New England. Four Sides to a House 

is a beautiful ballad — the crying of an old man, murdered, 

buried in a well. Words, rhymes, stanzas fall into place; 

the sound is true; the design complete and haunting. 

Here is one bead of the ballad string quoted for the 

pleasure of quoting: 

Around the house, and around the house. 

With a wind that is North, and a wind that is South, 

Peter, Peter. 
Mud and ooze and a dead man's wrist 
Wrenching the shutters apart, like mist 
The mud and the ooze and the dead man twist. 

They arc praying, Peter. 

This is a poem with intangible quality. Many of the 
others disobey the laws of measure andxontrast, which are 
bound up with mysteries, and which rule that shadows 
will be sure to count against a blaze of light or a blaze of 
incident, that brilliants come to life across a dark sky, 
that a dance is figured also by its pauses, and objects by 
the space they keep around them. Dorothy Dudley 


Spear-shajt and Cyclamen-flower 

SPEAR-SHAFT AND CYCLAMEN-FLOWER 

Hymeny by H. D. Henry Holt & Co. 

It is difficult to write an appreciation or criticism 
of modern literature because words have altered slowly 
during the past century and have lost their rightful 
meaning. Beauty, wisdom, life — these terms have come 
to represent an indefinite standard of pedantry or the 
washed-out sentiment of some school-room text. Civiliza- 
tion has rendered the states that these words should 
express almost impossible of achievement. So there is 
discontent, a brooding rebellion — no new forceful words 
and the old ones blurred until the same sentence may 
evoke for different people entirely separate worlds. 

Thus it has been said of H. D.'s earlier poetry that it 
was perfectly wrought but cold and passionless, and that 
it was concerned rather with the loveliness of a perished 
age than with the modern world or everyday emotions. 
But is it not simply the association of Greek with scholas- 
ticism, in the minds of these critics, that has led them 
astray in their consideration of the poet's work? 

Perfectly wrought the poems are: the rhythms swoop 
in and out of the head as birds perch and flutter in and 
out of apple-branches. Lines haunt the ears as the 
sound of rain in the South. The use of some simple 
but unexpected syllable brings all the fragrance into a 
mood that the Ionian roses suddenly awaken, after some 
swift storm. But they are not cold, they are not passion- 
less; and apart from the color of some Attic names how 

are these songs anything but the expression of the emo- 
tions and desires of an extremely present age? 

To people born in England H. D/s work is peculiarly 
American — ^American with a southern flavor and a sin- 
gularly native strength. Call Simaetha any American 
name and nothing is lost but the impersonality of the 
far-off, silver-grey Greek syllables. Circe is any woman 
of intellect who, with the very sincerity of her vision, 
turns lesser minds "each to his own self.'' The children 
in Hymen are strange in their beauty only because the 
restrictions of school have not seized them too early 
nor crushed them into patterns. 

It is true that H. D. is concerned with life, which 
changes little from epoch to epoch, rather than with 
the exterior impressions of telephones or steel rails. She 
is very sensitive to the visible world, but it is not particu- 
larly Greek; her country is any stretch of sea-coast in 
Europe or America where there are sand and low pools 
and surge of heavy rocks. Compare the Phaedra and 
the Hippolytus series, which were actually written in 
Greece, with Cuckoo Songy Thetis^ or Evadne. Apart from 
an added intensity of color — the "lizard-blue" water, 
the "red sands" of Crete — they are as independent as 
the poems written further north of any definite landscape. 

Could anything be more modern of mood than these 
€ew lines from At Baia? 

I should have thought 

In a dream you would have brought 


spear-shaft and Cyclamen-flower 

Some lovely, perilous thing — 

Orchids piled in a great sheath, 

As who would say (in a dream), 

I send you this 

Who left the blue vems 

Of your throat unkissed. 

The song is too long to quote in full> but it expresses per- 
haps more perfectly than any other recent poem, the dis- 
appointment and yet the sympathy which come when 
some personality one has admired fails to fulfil both its 
promise and its. task. 

It is not easy to be true to any faith in a war-torn 
world. Perhaps the most difficult test of all is to keep 
faith in beauty. But there is no sentiment or weakness 
in the lines which follow — they are stark as a war-chant 
or as waves against a prow: 

But beauty is set apart; 

Beauty is cast by the sea, ^ 

A barren rock; 

Beauty is set about 

With wrecks of ships 

Upon our coasts; death keeps 

The shallows — death waits 

Clutching toward us 

From the deeps. 

Beauty is set apart; 
The winds that slash its beach 
Swirl the coarse sand 
Upward toward the rocks. 

Beauty is set apart 
From the islands 
And from Greece. 

Life is a fact to the poet, not a dream. But she has 
a trick of hiding a difficult thought under a beautiful 
phrase until the eyes read the song carelessly, and only 
with the ripening of personal experience is the truth 
uncovered behind the vivid words. A psychological 
state that a scientist might take a volume to describe 
is crystallized into a couple of pages. And she can turn 
and write songs such as the one which follows, simple 
as any Elizabethan lyric and without the sixteenth- 
century mannerisms. 

From citron-bower be her bed, 
Cut from branch of tree a flower 
Fashioned for her maidenhead. 

From Lydian apples, sweet of husk, 
Cut the width of board and lathe. 
Carve the feet from myrtle-wood. 

Let the palings of her bed 

Be quince and box-wood overlaid 

With the scented bark of yew. 

That all the wood in blossoming. 
May calm her heart and cool her blood 
For losing of her maidenhood. 

Her psychology is never once at fault. Thetis, proud, 
beautiful and alone; Simaetha, wrecked by war; Phaedra, 
smashed by alien forces — it is only their names (perhaps 
their personal beauty) that differentiate them from the 
individuals who struggle and suffer in this present world. 
They are not easily found, but personality is rare in an 
age of standardized opinions and patented emotions. 


spear-shaft and Cyclamen-flower 

And perhaps the essential characteristic of these poems 
is their originality— they are cyclamen flowers caught 
on the spear-point of an analytical intellect. 

Not cold, not passionless, but with emotion and thought 
perfectly balanced. Hymen can make even the "dis- 
enchanted days" of which the poet writes, bright with 
beauty. W, Bryher 

"a distinguished young man" 

The Living Friezey by Mark Turbyfill. Monroe Wheeler, 

Evanston, 111. 

Mark Turbyfill is a young man, but has already been 
spoken of in print and out, and it is a pleasure to con- 
sider his poems as a whole in Mr. Wheeler's excellently 
made book. One has already heard so much unfortunate 
talk of Mr. TurbyfiU's estheticism, that one is lucky 
to have a slight acquaintance with his work as it has 
appeared in the magazines before approaching this book 
by way of the reviewers. When a reviewer in our gen- 
eration speaks of a poet as an "esthete" he is generally 
being sentimental about that poet's sentimentality; and 
this is a lamentable condition for a good word to reach. 
As for reviewers, they are largely static. 

For Mr. Turbyfill can indeed be sentimental, and 
that a good part of the time, his sentimentality being 
greatly patterned after the writings of that other esthete 
of late consideration, Richard Aldington. But it is not 

for this reason that he is one of the dozen or so living 
Americans who have done anything worth remembering. 
At his best, Mr. Turbyfill is the master of a certain 
fleeting precision that, like the finest of needles, strikes 
deep into one's being and is gone before it can be observed. 

I am the surprised young man, light walker on night lawns, 

he writes; and in a recognition and fuller exploitation of 
this fact willlie his greatness if he ever achieves it. This 
one sentence, unfortunately, is embedded in a long dis- 
cussion of a love-affair which has few merits; and very 
often Mr. Turbyfill spoils an excellent passage by not 
knowing where to cut. Had this passage stood alone, 
it had been one of his finest poems. 

Perhaps his weakness is a conscience which drives 
him to do complete justice to his friends, loves and admi- 
rations, wherever they have acted as the original impetus 
of a poem. He forgets that a poem is a state of perfec- 
tion at which a poet arrives by whatever means; and that 
the poem has no responsibility of any sort to ladies or 
lambrequins. It is a thing that begins somewhere and 
ends in itself. 

In such poems as Shapes- and Fertile Gesture Mr. 
Turbyfill has remembered, or not needed to remember, 
this fundamental truth. I quote Shapes intact, as an 
example of the poet at his finest: 

Let us deliberately sit into design 
With these elephant ears 


"/f Distinguished Young Man'* 

Stretched from the pot 

Into green wax consciousness. 

Let us exert 
Our unused selves 
Into other static 
Sharpnesses. ' 

In what fleet gestures 
Have you found eternity? 

His amber-painted torso 
A Persian dancer 
Has conceived into a leaf-line, 
The head inclined. 

Other poems that one remembers are She Walks to 
Pisa^ Fragment of Vision^ Carved Moody Burden of Blue 
and Goldy The Moments Halt a Little While before the 
Day^ and End of Summer. There are lines and passages 
scattered through other poems, the finest of these being 
the sentence already quoted, and the third stanza of 
The Intangible Symphony. 

To estimate the magnitude of such a poet as Mr. 
Turbyfill is a difficult if not impossible task. This despite 
the fact that at least one word of magnitude has been 
spoken of him in this review. But one can accurately 
say that his five or six finest poems are perfectly executed, 
and endrely achieve that which they apparently set out 
to achieve. And perhaps this is the fullest praise that 
one can give to any poet. Yvor Winters 



[a39l 




 

A PRIZE-WINNER 

Heavens and Earthy by Stephen Vincent Ben6t. Henry 

Holt & Co. 

(This book shared with Carl Sandburg's Smoke and 
Steel the Poetry Society's recent award of five hundred 
dollars to the best American verse published in 1920.) 

Not long ago I heard Robert Frost remark laughingly 
before an audience that one could practically place a 
poet as major or minor according to the number of times 
he used the word beauty. By that gauge Heavens and 
Earth is indeed a large order. 

The first section of the book is called Two Visions of 
Helen; it begins: 

Slowly blanch-handed Dawn, eyes half awake. 
Upraised magnificent the silver urn. 

The word morning appears in italics in the margin to 
print on the mind a clear and single image. One need 
not demand of Stephen Ben6t that he be either Carl 
Sandburg or J. V. A. Weaver — many of the younger 
poets are turning away with tired eyes from the verities 
of modern life. But Victoria is dead — that, at least, 
has been definitely settled; it is too late to contest it 
and futile to look back. 

The poet continues: 

Beautiful monstrous dreams they seemed as they ran, 
Trees come alive at the nod of a god grown mute! 
Their eyes looked up to the sun like a valiant man; 
Their bows clashed shrill on the loins and limbs of the brute! 


A Prize-winner 

The second line is quite plainly inserted to meet the 

exigencies of rhyme; the rest plainly a compromise with 

rhyme. An ultimate word exists that will do duty for 

both sense and sound. Is not art the pursuit of that 

word? 

Laughing, rejoicing, white as a naked birch, 
Slim as a spear in a torrent of moving towers, 
Itys, the prince, ran gay in the storm of their search 
Silverly shod on feet that outstripped the Hours 1 

Heavens and Earth so aptly illustrates the vices of its 
school that the expos4 may as well be thorough now it 
is begun. Was the towers line added only to rhyme with 
HourSy since white as a naked birch conveys not only 
color but form ? For me slim as a spear is, besides being 
poor economy, confusing; it leaves me with the blurred 
image of one who has stared for a long time at the same 
spot. Nature is admittedly prolix; it is left for that royal 
combination of gift and reason which determine the poet 
to model and trim beyond the possibility of confusion. 
Let the artist's scope be the universe, but let the artist 
hold the rein. It is admonitory to speculate on what 
the masters must have held in reserve in prunings alone, for 
they were all great economists. And who does not know 
that one thought leads to another? 

Stephen Ben6t has imagination; otherwise — one fails 

to detect behind his art that significant struggle for the 

final syllable, the final image. Rather a quick acceptance 

of what the tempter, tradition, whispers into the ear. 


an interesting line. He dreamed as a dog dreams ^ uneasily; 
and another. And how she smoothed her hair back with one 
handy the universal gesture of woman. But The Visions 
of Helen are not successful. What is the reason, if any, 
for the long symphonic arrangement? One has a right 
to expect that the form a poet uses justify itself. Many 
of Mr. Ben6t's changes of movement differ only in length 
of line; otherwise, the same overwrought design, the same 
lameness. Although both the Helen stories have a 
reasonable amount of inherent interest, one is left with 
the feeling that they might have been done carefully, 
in a page apiece, with more point. 

Two at the Crossroads dallies with the delicious idea 
of the meeting of one Palomides and a stranger; -Palo- 
mides riding furiously, his brain a black pin- wheel. He 
answers the stranger's inquiry after the sea-road with a 
maudlin account of his love for Iseult, and rides madly on. 
Then, the amusing d£nouement: 

Palomides was far. 
And, settling well his harp apon his back, 
With something of amusement in his mouth, 
Tristram rode southward to the Breton ships. 

But Mr. Ben£t is still without identity. In this in- 
stance it is a slightly chastened Tennyson. Many 
moderns write for the eye alone. H. D., William Carlos 
Williams, subordinate the oral to the visual, making 
a form akin in impression to the mural or bas-relief. 
The concern of the present poet is to grind out grand- 


A Prize-winner 

iloquent Victorian harmonies. Fortunately it has been 

proved, by Carl Sandburg among others, that on^ may 

write primarily for the ear and still retain the identity 

both of the individual and of the age. 

Take Three Days* Ride, the old theme of elopement and 

tragic outcome, a story which depends for very existence 

upon the unique style of the artist and its relevancy to 

period and locality. Certainly no man who takes pride 

in his modernity would have begun thus: 

We had fled full fast from her father's keep, 
And the time had come that we must sleep. 

For the rest, it is to be remembered that, as we live in 
the age of the superlative, hyperbole no longer has force 
behind it. To exaggerate in the hope of heightening 
the effect of drama is to frustrate oneself in advance. 
Simple statement of fact is more impressive. 

The Kingdom of the Mady the last section, a series of 
sonnets in a less serious humor, is more felicitous. The 
poet seems not quite so young and chaotic. He detaches 
himself and begins to speak in order with urbanity. 

" Books should be tried by a judge and a jury as though 
they were crimes, and counsel should be heard on both 
sides,'' says Samuel Butler in his Note Books. On my 
side, I am left with the unsatisfactory sense that Stephen 
Ben£t's verses are melodramatic accidents of rhythm 
and rhyme. I look in vain for volition, for image and 
thought too sacred to have been lightly changed. 


A LUTE OF ONE STRING 

The Lijted Cupy by Jessie B. Rittenhouse. Houghton 
Mifflin Co. 

This small book of forty or more very brief poems is a 
soft-voiced little lute of one string. So restricted a lyric 
range seems scarcely possible from a woman who has 
traveled about this varied world; and the emotional ex- 
perience it records is too narrow to be easily accepted as 
the whole truth. It is rather an unconscious yielding to 
a convention — the presentation of a wistful and sensitive 
feminine type as men and women of richer experience 
expect to find it. We have it caught to perfection in a 
number of these poems, for example The Door: 
There was a door stood long ajar 

That one had left for me. 
While I went trying other doors 

To which I had no key. 
And when at last I turned to seek 

The refuge and the light, 
A gust of wind had shut the door 
And left me in the night. 

Perhaps the following poem comes nearer escaping the 
convention than any other in this book — has a brighter 
bloom. Its first line is its title: 

We who give our hearts in spring, 

Putting all the old life by. 
We shall start with everything 

Keen and glad beneath the sky. 
We shall know the urge of grass 
Parting each detaining clod, 


A Lute of One String 



Know the one sweet day they pass — 
Flowers, the spirit of the sod. 

We are caught into the flame 
Where the golden fire runs — 

All its ardor is the same. 
In the fiesh and in the suns. 



A POET IN EMBRYO 



H.M. 



Archways of Life^ by Mercedes de Acosta. Moffat, Yard 

& Co. 

This book shows a distinct advance over Moods in 
poetic technique, although most of the poems still leave 
much to be desired. The author has certain gifts of the 
poet — quick feeling, a degree of imaginative insight, and 
eagerness to pour out her soul, to express the beauty 
and strangeness of life, to give herself away. She says 
what she has to say with a forthright simplicity and di- 
rectness; and in such poems as Platitudes and Your Face 
she says a fine thing, with refreshment in it. 

But she is just beginning to learn her trade. She 
shows a promising capacity to learn it in three or four 
poems — Unreality y Poor Fools ^ To Vouletti — in which 
there is a suggestion of poetic rhythm. Sometimes she 
uses rhyme — usually the irregular, half-veiled rhymes now 
so much in vogue; but not yet with quite the air of an 
adept. Occasionally she should give another thought to 
such details as grammar: one can stand will for j^//— all 
of us do that — but not "the maddest of we three." 

However, one may forgive much to a book which re- 
veals a fresh and ardent personality. And one may hope 
that after a few more experimental sheaves the art will 
respond to the impulse. H. M. 

RHETORIC UNASHAMED 

Ireland Unfreed: Poems of ig2i^ by Sir \^^iam Watson. 

John Lane G>. 

Rhetoric here marches unashamed across the cluttered 
stage of the world's affairs — ^rhetoric, flaunting exaggerated 
gestures under its shabby outworn toga, stubbing the 
toe of its stiflF buskin against 

rapine masked as order, his vast maw 
With Vengeance still andoyed. 

Is it possible that this kind of thing is still masking as 
poetry? — here begins a sonnet To the Prime Minister yet 
again: 

Like your renown-dad namesake, who did slay. 
Far across Hme and its vast chamds drear, 
If only with a legendary spear, 
A fabled dragon, you in your midday 
. Did unto ravening things give battle, and they 
Fdt your light lance through all their scales! 

Now, SO we are informed, that spear is "pointed at the 
captive maiden's breast" — and so on to the end, reading 
a bit out-of-date today« May the kind fates deliver 
Ireland from her friends! H. M. 


CORRESPONDENCE 



THE CODE OF MINORITY 



Everybody is sentimental, even Mr. Yvor Winters. 
Emily Dickinson, he says, is dowdy; Emerson, senti- 
mental; Whitman, an eventual dull vacuum; Sandburg, 
plasmodial delirium. I am not used to defending old 
gods, or new ones; but I can show, I think, that these 
adjectives indicate a sentimentalism that is not only Mr. 
Winters' but the characteristic of the larger group of 
modern noticeable poets. It is not expansive Germanic 
sentimentality, to be sure; it is protective sentimentality, 
hard and slender. But it is no less sentimental, for it is 
based on a conceit, on a vain study of approach and 
manner. Its mode is not determined by content. 

Whether New England hardness, which Mr. Winters 
reviews in A Cool Master in the February Poetry, is 
really the hardness that Mr. Winters is thinking about is 
doubtful. Whatever its hardness, the New England 
idea is primarily earnest — earnest frankly in the content 
of poetry — as Mr. Winters, to judge from his adjectives, 
can never be. When he can say cleverly, "This man has 
the culture to know that, to those to whom philosophy is 
comprehensible, it is not a matter of first importance; 
and he knows that these people are not greatly impressed 
by a ballyhoo statement of the principles of social and 
spiritual salvation," it is clear that he is not expounding 
New England hardness, nor anything like it, but the 

assumed hardness of sophisticated Gallic reaction. 
Poets — Emerson, Whitman, Sandburg — in whom the 
idea-content has a burning importance, may well seem 
to him blathering or sentimental, or beside the poetic 
point. In them the serious idea is not only an intel- 
lectual factor but a definitely esthetic component of 
the poem. Nor does Mr. Winters, in the face of the 
overwhelming human response to ideas, give any good 
reason why it should not be. Ideas have beauty. 

Whence this solemn authority that the poet may tell 
only what he sees, not what he thinks? It comes from 
a protective, contractile impulse. Fear of the world 
beyond the near perceptions, or failure to appreciate, 
is its basis. It is "safety first" in poetry. Blunder and 
bathos threaten the poet who risks being bigger than 
his sensations, and these too often do overwhelm him; 
but the naive exposure that he makes in extending him- 
self beyond protective certainties is necessary. He is 
"sentimental" perhaps, a "preacher," a "philosopher," 
a "peddler," because he cannot always fuse his own 
being with that of his subject matter. He opens himself, 
as Emerson, Whitman and Sandburg unquestionably 
do, to the sarcasm of the tight, cool, hard poets who take 
no risks, but he also escapes their inevitable minority. 
As a productive unit, as an initiative, the poet will never 
be thu$ pigeonholed. All that is humane and interesting 
is poetic. All material waits only the poet with capacity 
and power to use it. 


The Code of Minority 

"A pigeon's wing may make as great an image as a 
man's tragedy," says Mr. Winters. But the profound 
truth of the sentence is not the theme that Mr. Winters 
is defending in it. Emerson and Whitman, or for that 
matter the Vedas, reiterate this truth. It is the most 
beautiful of man's comprehensions; and, as the identity 
of all things, is the very being of art and life. But Mr. 
Winters means nothing of this sort by his pronouncement. 
That would be to "sentimentalize," to preach, and to 
enter untastefuUy into the idea-content of poetry. Mr. 
Winters means by his sentence that greatness lies not in 
those things of which the poet has written, "but in the 
perfect balance, the infallible precision, with which he has 
stated their cases." 

I use Mr. Winters for illustration because he reveals, 
rather more articulately than is usually considered good 
taste in his group, the ideational background of probably 
the larger number of modern poets. Theirs is an un- 
generous principle from which there can be no great 
progress. It is an assumption for the protection of 
minority. And because these presumed limitations are 
emotionalized somewhat, I am justified, I think, in calling 
the hard, cool minorists — the modern French, our Ameri- 
can expatriates in England, Mr. Winters, even Wallace 
Stevens — protectively sentimental. It is the cult of the 
craft, not of great art. 

Let me suggest the code. First: Say little, but say it 
beautifully. Second: Be delicate; nicety is first. Third: 

Be fragmentary; it indicates detachment; a frail wisp of 
fact, a plaintive, inarticulate thread of feeling is enough. 
Fourth: Be cool; sympathies are vulgar. Fifth: Be 
c^efiil; the limitations of the poetic milieu are fixed. 
This is the minor code or something like it, the world 
over. It is not classical, for its restraint has neither 
the amplitude nor the objectivity of the greater classic 
school. It is an introspective restraint, the last reserve 
of a decayed and romantic egoism. It is a hang-over, 
I think, from ante-bellum France. The indifferentism 
assumed by these poets is neither spiritual nor spacious; 
it is the cold chrysalis of individualism from which the 
butterfly has flown. 

Devotion, not detachment, is the foundation of art, 
and devotion these modern minors have not. They have 
ignored the artistic value of ideas. They have tatted 
gracefully in silk, but they have hammered no rhythms in 
steel. Ideas — even moral ideas, and character, though 
abused and betrayed in much Victorian poetry, remain 
primary components of great work. They will remain 
so, despite Mr. Winters and his perceptualists, simply 
for the reason that their Platonic as well as their human 
beauty persists. 

At least two major poets are writing today. They 
are Sandburg and Tagore. Different as they are, every 
poem of theirs, in its fusion of great and earnest content 
with personal form, denies Mr. Winters' thesis. 

Baker Brownell 


A New Poetry Society 

A NEW POETRY SOCIETY 

It would be difficult to enumerate the various evidences 
of increasing public interest in poetry, of at least a desire 
to give the art closer attention and better appreciation 
than it has had hitherto. The Poetry Lovers of America, 
a society inaugurated last year in Chicago, is one such 
evidence. Under the presidency of Mrs. D. Harry 
Hammer, it has had an auspicious and interesting first 
season, with five or six meetings at which modern poetry 
was read, and discussed from various points of view, the 
history, traditions and technique of the art being con- 
sidered as well as its modern influences and aims. The 
club's correspondence indicates wide interest in the 
subject, and other groups, through the Middle West 
especially, show a desire to be affiliated with it. The 
membership, of two hundred or more men and women, 
includes both professionals and amateurs. F. P. 

NOTES 

The April number of Poetry will be a Southern Number, the con- 
tributors representing the south-eastern section of the country, whose 
activities in poetry have been encouraged and stimulated during the 
past year by the Poetry Society of South Carolina, centering in Charles- 
ton. In addition to the poems, an editorial by Messrs. Du Bose 
Heyward and Hervey Allen will present the artistic point of view of the 
new-old South. These two poets will contribute a group of Carolina 
Chansons — ballads from the romantic history of the region; Miss 
Beatrice Ravenel, also of Charleston, will be represented, Mrs. Craig 
Barrow of Savannah, Mr. Marx G. Sabel and Mrs. Frances D. Pinder 
of Jacksonville, and others. 

Mr. Carl Sandburg, of Chicago, will publish his fourth book of poems 
in May /through Harcourt, Brace & Co. 

Mr. Louis Untermeyer,ofNew York, also needs no introduction. His 
new book of poems, to be called probably Roast Leviathan^ will be pub- 
lished in the late spring or autumn. 

Hortense Flexner (Mrs. Wyncie King) has recently removed from 
Louisville to Philadelphia, her husband having accepted a job as 
cartoonist for the Public Ledger. 

Mr. Morris Bishop, who is now living in Ithaca, N. Y., has appeared 
in Poetry before. Also Miss Sarah Unna, now resident in New York, 
who was a member of Mr. Bynner's poetry class at the University of 
California three years ago. 

Miss Marion Strobel, of Chicago, has been for two years associate 
editor of Poetry. 

Miss Ruth Harwood, a native of Salt Lake City and now resident in 
Oakland, California, appears for the first time in Poetry. Miss Har- 
wood took a poetry prize at the University of Utah in 1920, and the 
Emily Cook poetry prize at the University of California in 1921. 

Alison Buchanan is a pseudonym. 



BOOKS RECEIVED 

ORIGINAL verse: 

Sour GrapeSy by William Carlos Williams. Four Seas Co. 

VerseSy by Eulalie Andreas. Privately printed. New York. 

T?te ^uiei Courage and Other Songs of the Unafraid^ by Everard Jack 

Appleton. Stewart Kidd Co., Cincinnati. 
New AliarSy by Ethel Talbot SchefFauer. Wm. Kupe, Berlin, Germany. 
Depths and Shallows, by Sally Bruce Kinsolving. Norman Remington 

Co., Baltimore. 
Shafts 0/ Song, by James Latimer McLane, Jr. Norman Remington Co. 
Songs from the Lyric Road, by Ruth Harwood. Privately printed. 
The JVorld-hoax and The Disillusioned Genius, by C. A. Paul Dachsel. 

Privately printed, Portland, Ore. 
Poems, by Eunice Browning. Privately printed, Sacramento, Cal. 
Later Poems, by Bliss Carman. McClelland & Stewart, Toronto. 
Poems: New and Old, by Henry Newbolt. E. P. Dutton & Co. 




WE ARE IN THE MARKET FOR 



GREETING CARD VERSE SUITABLE 



FOR ALLOCCASIONSICHRISTMAS 



VALE/MTIAJE DAV,EASTER,M01HHS 



DAY ETC.PEACH VERSE MUST 



BE BRIEF-NOT MORE THAN SIX 



OR EIGHT LINES "AND MUST 



CONTAIN A DEFINITE MESSACEf 



NO GENERALITIES . HOWEVER 



GLAMOROUS OR GLITTERING.. 



IP HEADS IN THE CLOUDS IF YOU 



WISH.BUT FEET ON THE EARTH 



AT ALL TIMES. .IP BE SIMPLE 



HUMAN. IMAGINATIVE AND 



APPEALING.1* PROMPT CONSID^ 



ERATION AND REMUNERATION. 



P.RVOLLAND COMPANY 



5SE Washington Stnaet .Chicago 



 



7 WHAT IS THE LITTLE REVIEW ? 

An Anthology INTERNA- 
TIONAL of Aesthetiques— 

A review of painting, sculpture, 
design, architecture, prose, poetry, 
music, dance, drama, notes on the 
theatre, music-hall, cinema, circus, 
sports, books, and on the triumphs, 
experiments, crimes of the modem 
art world—* 

THE LITTLE REVIEW CANNOT BE IMITATED 

If 70a are not a magazine reader 

Subscribe to the Little Review 
If vou are tired of the imbecilic, dogmatic pretense of the 

ohi magazine. Sulwcrlbe to the LitUe Review 

If you are sad in the tranquillity of the newer magazines 

Subscribe to the Little Review 

If you find yourself a self-kleptomaniac in getting your art 
from fashion-society-journals 

Subscribe to the Little Review 

If you want a reorganization of the spirit 

Subscribe to the Little Review 

If you want to keep eternally young 

Subscribe to the Little Review 
If you want a contact with the men who are creating oiyili* 
******"* Subscribe to the Little Review 

Yearly, $7>00 Foreign, 12>00 Single Copy, $2.00 

27 West Eighth Street, NEW YORK CITY 



 



IVe Are Backing the Poets-- ^b»^ 
cfctj wi n Are You Backing Us? 

For a verse-writer to be printed in POETRY is about the 

most honorable of recognitions* 

Ford Afadox Huifflir in thg New York 
Eoening Post Literary Review. 

This monthly publication is an exhibition of literary faith 
and bravery that belong to the heroic age. 

The Daily Journal, East St. Louis. 

The varied interest and beauty presented are typical of 
POETRY'S quality. Thanks to a rare coincidence of 
poise and generous imagination, of sense and sensitiveness, 
it ranks easily as the best vehicle of poetry in the English 
language. 

From an oditorial in tho New York Sunday Tribune. 

POETRY has become a significant force 
in the intellectual life of America. That 
astute observer, the late William Marion 
Reedy, wrote: '^Probably Miss Monroe has 
done more for the high art of song than any 
other person in the United States" — a state- 
ment which has been generously supported 
by other commentators of similar prestige. 

POETRY: A Magazine of Verse 
543 Cass St., Chicago 

Enclosed find $3.00 (Canada, $3.15; foreign, $3.25) 
for one year's subscription to POETRY. 

Beginning 

Name 

Address 



 



A HEALTH FACTOR 
IN MANY HOMES 

"Horlick's" 

thm Original 
Malted MUk 

Delicious and inviijorating food-drink that improves 
of all aee 



the nutrition 



ages. 



Serve at meals and to refresh whenever fatigued or 
hungry during the day. A?oi4 imiutiont st the iou 



KNOWN BY ITS RECORD OF OVER ^ OF A CENHIRT 



BOUND VOLUMES 
of POETRY 

Complete volumes of POETRY bound in buckram with 

Index and Title Page 
Vol. 1— October, 1912 (Reprint) to March, 1913....»2.75 
AU Other Volumes, II-XVIII, each 2.00 

The bound volumes of POETRY make a well-nigh com- 
plete collection of the best verse written in English since 
October, 1912. No library should be without them. 

Binder/ prices having advanced to more than tufice what we originally 
paidf the above offer is scarcely higher than actual cost to us. Therefore it 
does not include postage or expressage^ which will be extra. Each volume 
wrapped^ weighs lyi pounds. 

Subscribers may ha*ue their vivn c§pies §f PoiTRY b$und f§r the 
exact c$st according t§ the binder's bill (Sl.So $r more for special 
orders). Or, if they return to us copies in perfect condition, we 
will send new volumes for Sl.6o each. 



POETRY 



543 CASS STREET 



thttf must hfptsA ouiftntts into. 



Harriet MoHr§e 
Edii9r 

Alice Corbin Henderson 

Marion Strobe! 

Ass9ciatt Bdit§ri 

Henry B, Fuller 
Eunice Tie t/ ens 
Lew Sarett 

Ad*vit9rf Committee 

Aiila Straub 

Buiinea Manager 



 



POETRY 

A MAGAZINE OF VERSE 

VOLUME XX 




l^,^l^$SEit^t (ffVitst 



VOLUME XX 

April-September, 1922 

Edited by 
Harriet Monroe 




232 EAST ERIE STREET 

CHICAGO 



 



Copyright 1922, 

by 
Harriet Monroe 



 



Boetiy 

A Magazine of \^e 



Editor 
Associate Editors 

Business Manager 
Advisory Committee 



Administrative Committee 



Harriet Monroe 
Alice Corbin Henderson 
Marion Strobel 
MiLA Straub 
Henry B. Fuller 
Eunice Tietjens 
Lew Sarett 
Charles H. Hamill 
Aksel K. Bodholdt 



TO HAVE great POETS 

there must be great audiences too 

Whitman 



SUBSCRIBERS TO THE FUND 



Mr. Howard Shaw 
Mr. Arthur T. Aldis 
Mr. Edwin S. Fetcher 
Mrs. Charles H. Hamill 
Mrs. Emmons Blaine (4) 
Mr. Wm. S. Monroe 
Mr. E. a. Bancroft 
Mr. C. L. Hutchinson 
Mrs. Wm. J. Calhoun 
Mrs. P. A. Valentine 



Mrs. Bryan Lathrop 

Mr. Martin A. Ryerson 

Hon. John Barton Payne 

Mr. Thomas D. Jones 

Mr. Charles Deering 

Mrs. W. F. Dummer 

Mr. Arthur Heun 

Mr. Edward F. Carry 

Mr. Cyrus H. McCormick (2) 

Mr. F. Stuyvesant Peabody 



[i] 



 



Miss Dorothy North 

Mrs. F. Louis Slade 

Mrs. Julius Rosenwald 

Mrs. Andrea Hofer Proudfoot 

Mrs. Arthur T. Aldis 

Mrs. George W. Mixter 

Mrs. Walter S. Brewster 

Mrs. Joseph N. Eisendrath 

Mrs. Simeon Ford 

Mrs. Thomas W. Lamont 

Mr. Henry J. Patten 

Mr. Charles H. Dennis 

Mrs. Otto Sei£Fert 

Mrs. Richard T. Crane 

Mrs. William M. Lybrand 

Mr. Charles H. Swift 

Mr. S. T. Jacobs 

Mrs. Jacob Baur 

Mr. A. D. Lundy 

Mrs. Robert N. Montsomery 

Miss Joanna Fortune 

Mrs. Rockefeller McCormick 

Mrs. Francis Neilson 



Mr. Horace S. Oakley 

Mr. Eames MacVeagh 

Mr. Charles G. Dawes 

Mr. Owen F. Aldis 

Mr. Albert H. Locb (2) 

The Misses Skinner 

Misses Alice E. and Margaret D. 

Moran 
Miss Mary Rozet Smith 
Mrs. John Borden 
Mrs. Clarence I. Peck 
*Mr. John S. MiUer 
Mrs. Frank O. Lowden 
Mra. Frederic Clay BarUett 
Mr. Rufus G. Dawes 
Mr. Gilbert E. Porter 
Mr. George A. McKinlock 
Mrs. Samuel Insull 
Mr. A. G. Becker 
Mrs. Roy McWUUams 
Mr. Benjamin V. Becker 
Mr. George F. Porter 
Mrs. Charles A.* Chapin 
Mr. S. O. Levinson 
*Deuastd 

Others besides these guarantors who testify to their appreciation of the mag- 
azine by generous gifts are: 

Mr. Edward L. Ryerson, Miss Amy Lowell, Mrs. Edgar Speyer and Mr. 
Edward C. Wentworth. 

Three annual prizes will be awarded as usual in November for good work 
of the year now ending. To the donors of these prizes, as well as to the above list 
of guarantors, the editor wishes to express the appreciation of the 8ta£f and the poets: 

To Mr. S. O. Levinson. for the Helen Haire Levinson Prize of two hundred 
dollars, to be awarded for the ninth time: to the anonymous guarantor who will 
present, for the eighth time, a prize of one hundred dollars; and to the Friday Club 
of Chicago, which has donated one hundred dollars for a prize to a young poet. 

We feel that these prizes are a most valuable service to the art. 

The editor records with deep regret the death, on May twenty-ninth, of Mr. 
William T. Abbott. In spite of his arduous more important duties, Mr. Abbott 
has most graciously served as a member of Poetry's Administrative Committee 
ever since the magazine was founded; and the high authority of his name has been, 
to our guarantors and the public, an assurance of financial soundness. This service 
will always be remembered with gratitude by the staff of the magazine. 

The death, on February sixteenth, of Mr. John S. MiUer, the distinguished 
Chicago lawyer, removed from our immediate presence one of the most lo3^ friends 
of the magazine, who had been one of its guarantors from the beginning. The 
editor remembers vividly and gratefully a witty and discriminating speech which 
Mr. Miller made at a Pobtry banquet, showing the depth of his appreciation of 
the "new movement." and of the magazine'tf aims and ideals. 



(lil 



 



CONTENTS OF VOLUME XX 
VERSE 

PAGB 

Allen, Hervey: 

Thb Sba-Islands: 

Shadows 6 

Sunshine 8 

Macabre in Macaws 11 

Hag-hollerin' Time 12 

Upstairs Downstairs. Palmetto Town 13 

Audander, Joseph: 

I Have Waited for You Long 72 

LitUe Lou 73 

Barren, Elfrida De Renne: 
Vbrsbs: 

Impressions. Recognition 19 

Twilight. Death 20 

I Wonder 21 

Barry, Iris: 

Shadow Songs: 

Lamentation. Virgin Moon 312 

An Unposted Letter, Nocturne 313 

BeUamann, Henry: 

High Trees IS 

Beyers, Meredith: 

Bit of Curls. Fat Man 141 

Bogan,^ Louise: 

Bbginning and End: 

Elders. Resolve 248 

Knowledge 249 

Lcave-Taldng, To a Dead Lover 250 

Broadus, Kemper Hammond: 
Rough Ways: 
Burnt Out. BUssard 78 

Coatsworth, BltMabeth: 
CocKLB Shblls: 

The Ship. The Cows 128 

Stream. Broadway 129 

At Versailles 130 

ConUing, Hilda: 

Song Nbts: 261 

Snow Morning 261 

What I Said. Little Green Bermuda Poem 262 

When MoonUght Falls. Elsa 263 

Cloudy Pansy. Field-mouse 264 

••I Wondered and Wondered " 265 

Davies, Mary Carolyn: 

Portrait of a House 131 

The Last of the Cowboys 133 

Dresbach, Glenn Ward: 

In Western Mountains Mil 76 

Fischer, Raymond P.: 

AYearl-rV 84 

Galahad, Joseph Andrew: 

A Mood 123 

[iii] 



 



PAGB 

Gavin, John H.: 

Creeds MI 80 

Immortality 82 

Gilbert, Morris: 

Prediction 200 

Golding, Louis: 

Full of Laughter 196 

Greenhood, David: 

A Psalm for Cathlccn Ni Hoolihan 74 

Liberty 75 

Grudin, Louis: 

Two Sonnets: 

"All Roads Lead to Rome". Jest 306 

Hammond, Louise S,: (.tran^ations from the Chinese) 
Poems FROki the Chinese: 

An Old Man's Song of Spring (By Seng Dji-Nan) 252 

Seeking the Hermit in Vain (By Gia Dao) 252 

On Being Denied AdmitUnce to a Friend's Garden (By Yeh Shih) . 252 

The Sudden Coming of Spring (By Cheng Hoc) 253 

Night-Ume in Spring (By Vrafigi4it-5At/0 254 

Henderson, Daniel: 

Friendship 127 

Herald, Leon: 

A Trifoliate: 

Beauty. My Wedding 314 

In Your Eyes 315 

Heyward, Du Bose: 

Charleston Poems: 

Dusk 1 

Edgar Allan Poe 2 

Matins 5 

Holden, Raymond: 

Night Above the Tree Line 124 

Jones, Louise: 

When Love Is Gone 18 

Kinsolving, Sallie Bruce: 

Anguish 307 

Kreymborg, Alfred: 

Pianissimo ^.175 

Langbridge, Rosamond: 

The White Moth 194 

The GenUe Housewife 195 

Lee, Munai 

These Are But Words: 

The Sonnet 235 

Sonnets MX 236 

Mastin, Florence Ripley: 

Your Hands, From the Telephone 247 

McClure, John: 

Owl-blasted 135 

McClushey, Katherine Wisner: 
Summer Phases: 

The Spree, Transit 254 

A Parable 255 

WhoUy Happy 256 

McFadden, Athena: 

Your Words 134 

Mclntyre, CarlyU: 

On the Road: 

livl 



 



PAGE 

Promenading. The Sdssor-grinder 70 

The Visit 71 

Milam, May Thomas: 
Two PoBBis: 
Open a Door, Jenice 25 

Monroe, Harriet: 

Notes of Travel: 

On the Train Mil 188 

At O'Neill's Point 189 

In the Yellowstone, Utah 191 

In High Places 193 

Morton, David: 

These Fields at Evening . 125 

Nethercot, Arthur H.: 

Triad 316 

North, Jessica Nelson: 
At Night: 

The Sleeper 242 

First Autumn 243 

Dreams. Suddenly 244 

Bogie 245 

Boatman, To the Man who Loves Twilight 246 

Pinckney, Josephine: 

Spring Makes Me Wonder 21 

Pinder, Frances Dickenson: 
Marsh Sketches: 

Sea Marsh 22 

Marsh Pools 23 

Shallows 24 

Ravenel, Beatrice: 
Tidewater: 

Harbor Water 26 

White Azaleas in Magnolia Gardens. Dew 27 

The Only Child 28 

LiU* Angels 29 

Ridge, Lola: 

In Russia: 

The Spilling of the Wine 201 

Snow Dance for the Dead 203 

The White Bird 204 

Ripola, Flora Shufeli: 

Question 77 

Roberts, Elizabeth Madox: 

Talk from the Dust: 

The Sky, Numbers 257 

Autumn 258 

The People, A Beautiful Lady 259 

August Night 260 

Roe. Robert J.: 

A Sailor's Note-book: 

Typhoon, Sea l-lll 142 

Wind I-III 143 

Moon. Cautious, Apparition 144 

Sailor, Barney 145 

Insight, Jock, Stars 146 

Meinself 147 

Rosenthal, A. A.: 

Syncrasy 197 

Russmann, Helen C: 

Fantasy 136 



 



PAGE 

Ryan, Katheryn WhiU: 
Two Poems: 
Moonlight. Convent 137 

Sabd, Marx C: 

Two Poems: 

Recordition 16 

The Core 17 

Sanders, Emmy Veronica: 
Antagonisms: 

Laughter 300 

Into Thcee Things 301 

P&ning 303 

Hill Speech 304 

Sa^r, Edward: 

A Walking Poem 317 

Schneider, Isidor: 

Conversation MI 117 

The Mist 121 

Sherry, Laura: 

Rfdgb People: 

My Country 293 

A Native, Nothin'— Somethin* 294 


Grand-dad's Blu£f 296 

In Mist. Light Magic 297 

Late Autumn in the Hills 298 

The Season 299 

Simpson, William H,: 

Along Old Trails: 

Los Llanos 59 

Hopi Song of the Desert 60 

Yucca Is Yellowing, Bareback 61 

Rain in the HilU, Navajo 62 

Tewa Song 63 

Desert Night, Mafiana 64 

Burro Loads. Landscape 65 

Trees, Country Night 66 

Inarticulate. So UtUe You Are MI 67 

De Noche. The Trail Up-sky 68 

Campo Santo 69 

SitwOl. Osbert: 

Maxixe 126 

Speyer, Leonora: 

Reflections: 

Duet 308 

At the Hospital for the Insane. Song Overheard 309 

Kind Fate. The Stronghold. Looking On 310 

A Truth About a Lie. Couplets 311 

Turner, Aha N.: 

Three Poems: 

Old Age, Our Sorrow 138 

Margarette 139 

Welles, Winifred: 

saver Fog 83 

Weston, Mildred: 

A Portrait 79 

Wheelock, John Hall: 

In the Dark City 187 

[vil 



 



PAGB 

Wickkam, Anna: 

King Alfred and the Peasant Woman 198 

A Poet Advises a Change of Clothes 199 

Winters, Yvor: 

POBMS: 

The Little Deity Alone in the Desert 318 

Late Winter, A Requiem for the Memory of Bees 318 

Chicago Spring 319 

Old Spring. The Silent Days 320 

Lament, Beside an Acequia. for the Wife of Awa-tsireh . . . .321 
"The Fragile Season" 322 



PROSE 

This Southern Number H. M. 31 

Poetry South Hervey Alien and DuBose Heyward 35 

Poe in South Carolina H. A. 48 

Reviews : 

A Sonneteer denway WescoU 49 

Poems, by Stewart Mitchell 

A French Victorian H. M. 51 

Plays of Edmond Rostand, tr'd by Henderson Daingerfield Norman 

CORRESPONDBNCB : 

Notes from the P. S. A. Annual Dinner Dorothy Dudley 53 

Imports from Africa C. S. 56 

Moving a. M, 88 

Reviews: 
A Woman with a Hammer Yvor Winters 93 

The Contemplative Quarry and The Man with a Hammer, by Anna Wickham 

We, the Musk Chasers, by Loureine Aber 
Quaker-gray and Rose Lola Ridge 99 

Willow Pollen, by Jeannette Marks 
Vicarious Earoerience Muna Lee 102 

Clouds and Cobblestones, by Hortense Flexner 
Jean Cocteau RoUo H. Myers 103 

Poisies— 1917-1920, and CarU Blanche, by Jean Cocteau 
Our CoNTBkfPORARiEs: 

More New Magazines 109 

Correspondence : 

From the President of the P. S. A WiUer Bynner HI 

A Word for Mr. Guest Gamaliel Bradford 114 

Prosody H. if . 148 

Reviews: 
Charlotte Mew Marion Strobel 152 

Saturday Market, by Charlotte Mew 
A Spirit of Quest Emanuel Carnevali 155 

Explorations, by Robert McAlmon 

The Golden Darkness, and In Gossamer Grey, by Oscar Williams 
Slight Songs Muna Lee 160 

Songs from the Journey, by Wilton Agnew Barrett 
A Japanese Cosmopolite Jun Pujita 162 

Seen and Unseen and Selected Poems, by Vone Noguchi 



[vlil 



 



PAGE 

Dante In English Rhyme Hetiry B. Fuller 165 

Th4 Divine Conudy of Danle Alighieri, tr'd by Melville Best Anderson 

CORRBSPONDBNCE : 

A Word from Mr. Untermeyer 168 

Robert Burns Wilson A Kentuckian 171 

Shelley H. M. 206 

A New Pulitzer Prize H. if. 215 

RsviB^vs* 

Carlos WiUiams' New Book Yvor Winters 216 

Stmr Grapes, by William Carios WiUiams 

A Sunlit Clearing Pearl Anddson 220 

Dreams Out of Darkness, by Jean Starr Untermeyer 

Tarnished Gold Agnes Lee Freer 223 

Paul Verlaine, by Harold Nicolson 

Slavic Poetry Isidcr Schneider 228 

Modern Russian Poetry, tr'd by Babette Deutsch and Avrahm Yarmolinsky 
Anthology of Modern Slavonic Literature, and Modern Czech Poetry, 

tr'd by P. Selver 
'An Anthology of Jugoslav Poetry, ed. by Dr. B. S. Stanoyevich 

Nature the Source H. M, 266 

On Translating Chinese Poetry — I Eunice Tietjens 268 

Reviews: 


Poems: Second Series, by J. C. Squire 

Red Wrath H. M. 216 

Bars and Shadows — the Prison Poems of Ralph Chaplin 

Calm Waters Marion Strobel 280 

The Blue Ship, by Herbert Jones 

From the Nineties to the Present Royall Snow 282 

A Shropshire Lad, by A. E. Housman 
Poems New and Old, by Henry Newboit 
Poems, with Fables in Prose, by Herbert Trench 
Later Poems, by Bliss Carman 
The CMecled Poems of James Elroy Flecker 
Correspondence: 

Paris Notes Jean Caiel 287 

Mea Culpa H. M. 323 

On Translating Chinese Poetry — II Eunice Tietjens 328 

Reviews * 

His Home Town H. M. 334 

Slabs of the Sun^^furni West, by Carl Sandburg 

Muriel Stuart Marion Strobel 338 

The Cockpit of Idols, by Muriel Stuart 

Tranquil Tunes Marion Strobel 340 

Cross-currents, by Margaret Widdemer 


The Magpie's Shadow, by Yvor Winters 

Teacher and Critic Nelson Antrim Crawford 344 

On English Poetry, by Robert Graves 

Asia Emanuel Carnevali 346 

Early Persian Poetry, by A. J. Williams Jackson 

Selections from the Rubaiyat of Hafiz, tr'd by a member of the Persia Society 

of London 
Chips of Jade and Betel Nuts, tr'd. by Arthur Guiterman 
The Garden of Bright Waters, and Colored Stars, by £. Powys Mathers 

Notes 57.115.172,233,291.349 

Books Received 58.116.174.234.292,350 



[viiil 



 



POETRY 

A MAGAZINE OF VERSE 

VOLUME XX 






Vol. XX 



No. I 




A Magazine of Verse 
Edited by ELarriet Monroe 

April 1922 
Southern Number 



Charleston Poems 

by DuBose Heyward 
The Sea-islands 

by Hervey Allen 
Tidewater 

by Beatrice Ravenel 



543 Cass Street, Chicaifo 

^.00 per Year Single Numbers 25c 



 



How I with that Mme Boglith pftper had anytUng like the authentic vitality of 
POBntTl Lotus GcUimt 

' Vol. XX No. I 

! POETRY for APRIL, 1922 

PAGE 

Charleston Poems DuBosi H€yward i 

Dusk— Edgar Allan Poe— Matins 

The Sea-islands Himy Alkn 6 

I Shadows — Sunshine — Macabre in Macaws — Hag-hoUerin' 

I lune — Upstairs Downstairs — Palmetto Town 

High Trees Henry BiUammm 15 

Two Poems Marx G. Saiil 16 

Reoordidon — ^The G>re 

When Love is Gone Louui Jongs 18 

Verses Effrsda De Renm Barrow 19 

Impressions — Recognition — Twilight — Death — I Wonder 

Spring Makes Me Wonder Josephim Pinckney 21 

I Marsh Sketches Franca Dickenson Finder 22 

I Seft Marsh — Marsh Pools — Shallows 

Two Poems ' . . May Thomas Milam 25 

Open a Door — Jenice 
Tidewater Beatrice Raoenel 26 

Harbor Water — White Azaleas in Magnolia Gardens — Dew 

— The Only Child -- Liir Angels 

This Southern Number H.M. 31 

Poetry South .... Hervey Allen and DuBose Heyward 2S 

Poe in South Carolina H. J. 4S 

Reviews: 

A Sonneteer GUnway Wescott 49 

A French Victorian H.M.$i 

Correspondence* 

Notes from the P. S. A. Annual Dinner Dorothy Dudley 53 

Imports horn Afnau C. ^. 56 

Notes and Books Received 57* 5^ 



Maauerlpts must be aooompaaied by a stamped and sdf-addresNd envelope. 
* * * ' " ' *" Unitr* " ^' 



In the United States. Merieo. Cuba and 
' "^lSiiet:inaIlothcreoaiitrfesintbe 



ladmive yearly subscrlxitioB lates. In 
Amerieaa pbisbiiIoih, $3.00 net; ia Canada, 

Foetal Ualoa.tS.35 net. Batefed as seoon 

poet-dOee. at ChlcMIo. lU.. aader Act of Maivh 3. 1379. 

Published monthly at 543 Cass St., Chicago, 111. 

Copyrigki 1922, hy Barrta Miomroe. AU Hghit rtMr9$d> 



ftS.35 net. Batefod as seoMid-cla« amtter Nov. 15. 1912. at the 




^/•RA^ 



Boetry "ko^ 

A Magazine of \^e 



APRIL 1922 
SOUTHERN NUMBER 



CHARLESTON POEMS 

DUSK 

THEY tell me she is beautiful, my city, 
That she is colorful and quaint; alone 
Among the cities. But I — I who have known 
Her tenderness, her courage, and her pity; 
Have felt her forces mold me, mind and bone, 
Life after life, up from her first beginning — 
How can I think of her in wood and stone! 
To others she has given of her beauty: 
Her gardens, and her dim old faded ways; 
Her laughter, and her happy drifting hours; 
Glad spendthrift April, squandering her flowers; 
The sharp still wonder of her autumn days; 

[I] 




 

Her chimes, that shimmer from St. Michael's steeple 

Across the deep maturity of June 

Like sunlight slanting over open water 

Under a high blue listless afternoon. 

But when the dusk is deep upon the harbor, 

She finds me where her rivers meet and speak, 

And while the constellations gem the silence 

High overhead, her cheek is on my cheek. 

I know her in the thrill behind the dark 

When sleep brims all her silent thoroughfares. 

She is the glamour in the quiet park 

That kindles simple things like grass and trees; 

Wistful and wanton as her sea-born airs, 

Bringer of dim rich age-old memories. 

Out on the gloom-deep water, when the nights 

Are choked with fog, and perilous, and blind. 

She is the faith that tends the calling lights. 

Hers is the stifled voice of harbor bells, 

Muffled and broken by the mist and wind. 

Hers are the eyes through which I look on life 

And find it brave and splendid. And the stir 

Of hidden music shaping all my songs, 

And these my songs, my all, belong to her. 

EDGAR ALLAN POE 

Once in the starlight 
When the tides were low, 


DuBose Heyward 



And the surf fell sobbing 

To the undertow, 
I trod the windless dunes 

Alone with Edgar Poe. 

Dim and far behind us, 

Like a fabled bloom 
On the myrtle thickets, 

In the swaying gloom 
Hung the clustered windows 

Of the barrack-room. 

Faint on the evening, 

Tenuous and far 
As the beauty shaken 

From a vagrant star. 
Throbbed the ache and passion 

Of an old guitar. 

Life closed behind us 
Like a swinging gate, 

Leaving us unfettered 
And emancipate; 

Confidants of Destiny^ 
Intimates of Fate. 

I could only cower 
Silent, while the night. 

Seething with its planets. 
Parted to our sight, 


POETRYs A Mmimzine of Verse 

Sh^mitig ttt infiiutf 
In its breadth ajid hdght. 

Bur mf choieii comrade, 

Towfig back hk hair 
Wifh the old loved gesture, 

Ibujed his face, and there 
Shone that agonjr that those 

Loved of God must bear. 

Oh, we heard the many things 

Silence has to say — 
He and I together 

As alone we lay 
Waiting for the slow sweet 

Miracle of day. 

When the bugle's silver 

Spiralled up the dawn 
Dew-clear, night-cool, 

And the stars were gone, 
I arose exultant, 

Like a man new-bom. 

But my friend and master. 

Heavy-limbed and spent. 
Turned, as one must turn at last 

From the sacrament; 
And his eyes were deep with God's 

Burning discontent. 


DuBose Heyward 



BCATINS 



I saw you pray today 

Out in the park — 
Poor little storm-driven 

Child of the dark. 

Body to earth you lay 

On the young grass, 
Learning the shining way 

April may pass. 

I saw the clear song 

Cardinals make 
Brush your face tangibly. 

Like wind on the lake. 

Then, in the hedge 

Where japonicas grew, 
A little breeze was born. 

Boyish and new. 

I saw it find you 

And rustle your name; 
Lift you, and carry you 

Like a slim flame 

Out where the trees break. 

Leaving wide skies. 
Now I sec always 

The prayer in your eyes. DuBose Heyward 
THE SEAJSLANDS 

SHADOWS 

There is deliberateness in all sea-island ways> 

CXitlandish to our days as stone wheels are. 

The islands cannot see the use of life 

Which only lives for change; 

Their days are flat. 

And all things there move slowly. 

Even the seasons are conservative — 

No sudden flaunting of wild colors in the fall, 

Only a gradual fading of the green. 

As if the earth turned slowly. 

Or looked with one still face upon the sun 

As Venus does; 

Until the trees, the fields, the marshes. 

All turn dun, dull Quaker brown. 

And a mild winter settles down. 

And mosses are more gray. 

All human souls are glasses which reflect 

The aspects of the outer world. 

See what terrible gods the huge Himalayas bred!- 

And the fierce Jewish Jaywah came 

From the hot Syrian desert 

With his inhibitory decalogue. 

The gods of little hills are always tame; 

Here God is dull, where all things stay the same. 


Hervey Allen 

No change on these sea-islands! 

The huge piled clouds range 

White in the cobalt sky; 

The moss hangs. 

And the strong tiring sea-winds blow — 

While day on glistering day goes by. 

The horses plow with hanging heads — 

Slow, followed by a black-faced man. 

Indifferent to the sun. 

The old cotton bushes hang with whitened heads; 

And there among the live-oak trees 

Peep the small whitewashed cabins, 

Painted blue perhaps, with scarlet-turbaned women, 

Ample-hipped, with voices soft and warm; 

And the lean hounds and chocolate children swarm. 

Day after day the ocean pumps 

The awful valve-gates of his heart, 

Diastole and systole through these estuaries; 

The tides flow in long gray weed-streaked lines; 

The salt water, like the planet's lifeblood, goes 

As if the earth were breathing with long-taken breaths 

And we were very near her heart. 

No wonder that these faces show a tired dismay. 
Looking on burning suns, and scarcely blithe in May. 
Spring's coming is too fierce with life, 
And summer is too long; 

The stunted pine trees struggle with the sand 
Till the eyes sicken with their dwarfing strife. 

There are old women here among these island homes. 

With dull brown eyes that look at something gray. 

And tight silver hair, drawn back in lines, 

Like the beach grass that's always blown one way; 

With such a melancholy in their faces 

I know that they have lived long in these places^ 

The tides, the hooting owls, the daylight moons. 

The leprous lights and shadows of the mosses, 

The funereal woodlands of these coasts. 

Draped like a hearse. 

And memories of an old war's ancient losses, 

Dwell in their faces' shadows like gray ghosts. 

And worse — 

The terror of the black man always near. 

The drab level of the rice-fields and the marsh 

Lend them a mask of fear. 



SUNSHIKE 

Do you suppose the sun here lavishes his heat 

For nothing in these islands by the sea? 

No! The great green-mottled melons ripen in the fields, 

Bleeding with scarlet juicy pith deliciously; 

And the exuberant yams grow golden, thick and sweet; 


Hervey Allen 



And white potatoes in grave-rows. 
With leaves as rough as cat-tongues, 
And pearly onions and cabbages 
With white flesh sweet as chicken-meat. 

These the black boatmen bring to town 

On barges, heaped with severed breasts of leaves, 

Driven by put-put engines 

Down the long canals quavering with song. 

With hail and chuckle to the docks along; 

Seeing their dark faces down below 

Reduplicated in the sunset glow, 

While from the shore stretch out the quivering lines 

Of the flat palm-like reflected pines 

That inland lie like ranges of dark hills in lines. 

And so to town — 

Weaving odd baskets of sweet grass 

Lazily and slow. 

To sell in the arcaded market 

Where men sold their fathers not so long ago. 

For all their poverty. 

These patient black men live 

A life rich in warm colors of the fields. 

Sunshine and hearty foods; 

Delighted with the gifts that earth can give, 

And old tales of Plateye and Brc*r Rabbit; 

While the golden-velvet cornpone browns 

Underneath the lid among hot ashes, 

Where the groundnuts roast 

Round shadowy fires at nights — 

With tales of graveyard ghost, 

While eery spirituals ring 

And organ voices sing, 

And sticks knock maddening rhythms on the floor 

To shuffling youngsters "cutting" buck-and-wing; 

Dogs bark; 

And woolly pickaninnies peek about the door. 

Sundays, along the moss-draped roads. 

The beribboned black folk go to church 

By threes and twos, carrying their shoes; 

With orange turbans, ginghams, rainbow hats. 

Then bucks flaunt tiger-lily ties and cobalt suits. 

Smoking cob pipes and faintly sweet cheroots. 

Wagons with oval wheels and kitchen chairs screech by, 

Where Joseph-coated white-teethed maidens sit 

Demurely, 

While the old mule rolls back the ivory of his eye. 

Soon from the whitewashed churches roll away. 

Among the live-oak trees. 

Rivers of melancholy harmonies. 

Full of the sorrows of the centuries 

The white man hears, but cannot feel. 

But it is always Sunday on sea-islands. 
Plantation bells, calling the pickers from the fields. 
Are like old temple gongs; 

[lO] 



 



Hervey Allen 



And the wind tells monodies among the pines. 

Playing upon their strings the ocean's songs. 

The ducks fly in long trailing lines; 

Geese honk and marsh-hens quank 

Among the tidal flats and rushes rank on rank. 

On island tufts the heron feeds its viscid young, 

And the quick mocker catches 

From lips of sons of slaves the eery snatches 

And trolls them as no lips have ever sung. 

Oh, it is good to be here in the spring. 

When water still stays solid in the North, 

When the first jasmine rings its golden bells. 

And the wild wistaria puts forth; 

But most because the sea then changes tone — 

Talking a whit less drear. 

It gossips in a smoother monotone. 

Whispering moon-scandal in the old earth's ear. 



MACABRE IN MACAWS 

After the hurricane of the late forties, 

Peter Polite says, in the live-oak trees 

Were weird macabre macaws. 

And ash-colored cockatoos blown overseas 

From Nassau and the West Indies. 

These hopped about like dead men's thoughts 

[II] 




 

Amid the draggled Spanish moss> 

Preening themselves, all at a loss; 

Mewing faint caws. 

And shrieking with nostalgia — 

With dull screams like a child 

Born with neuralgia. 

And this seems true to me, 

Fitting the landscape's drab grotesquery. 



HAG-HOLLERIN TIME 

Black Julius peered out from the galley door; 

Behind Jim Island, lying long and dim. 

An infra owl-light tinged the twilight sky 

As if a bonfire burned for cherubim. 

Dark orange flames came leering through the pines; 

And then the moon's face, struggling with a sneeze, 

Along the flat horizon's level lines 

Her nostrils fingered with palmetto trees. 

Her platinum wand made water-wrinkles buckle. 
Old Julius gave appreciative chuckle — 
"It's jes about hag-hollerin' time," he said. 
I watched the globous buckeyes in his head 
Peer back along the bloody moon-wash dim 
To see the fish-tailed water-witches swim. 


Hervey Allen 

UPSTAIRS DOWNSTAIRS 

The judge^ who lives impeccably upstairs 
W\t)i dull decorum and its implication. 
Has all his servants in to family prayers 
And edifies his soul with exhortation. 
Meanwhile, his blacky live wastefully downstairs; 
Not always chaste, they manage to exist 
With less decorum than the judge upstairs, 
And find withal a something that he missed. 

This painful fact a Swede philosopher. 
Who tarried for a fortnight in our city. 
Remarked one evening at the meal, before 
We paralyzed him silent with our pity; 
Saying the black man, living with the white. 
Had given more than white men could requite. 



PALMETTO TOWN 

Sea4sland winds sweep through Palmetto Town, 

Bringing with piny tang the old romance 

Of pirates and of smuggling gentlemen; 

And tonnes as languorous as southern France 

Flow down her streets like water-talk at fords; 

While through iron gates where pickaninnies sprawl 

The sound comes back, in rippled banjo chords. 




 

From lush magnolia shades where mockers call. 

Mornings, the flower-women bring their wares — 

Bronze caryatids of a genial race,' 

Bearing the bloom-heaped baskets on their heads; 

Lithe, with their arms akimbo in wide grace, 

Their jasmine nodding jestingly at cares. 

Turbaned they are, deep-chested, straight and tall, 

Bandying old English words now seldom heard 

But sweet as Provencal. 

Dreams peer like prisoners through her harp-like gates 

From molten gardens mottled with gray gloom. 

Where lichened sundials shadow ancient dates, 

And deep piazzas loom. 

Fringing her quays are frayed palmetto posts, 

Where clipper ships once moored along the ways. 

And fanlight doorways, sunstruck with old ghosts, 

Sicken with loves of her lost yesterdays. 

Often I halt upon some gabled walk. 

Thinking I see the ear-ringed picaroons. 

Slashed with a sash and Spanish folderols. 

Gambling for moidores or for gold doubloons. 

But they have gone where night goes after day; 

And the old streets are gay with whistled tunes, 

Bright with the lilt of scarlet parasols 

Carried by honey-voiced young octoroons. 

Hervey Allen 




HIGH TREES 

There is unprisoned day up there: 

The even flow of level lights. 
The passing of the wilder rains, 
The perfect circle of the world — 
These, and the longer ride with sun, 
The earlier tryst with stars. 
The virgin silver of the moon! 

It must be well to hear 
The broken song of trampled dust. 
The long complaint of streets. 
Soothed to uncertainty — 
Earth's weaving flutter laid aside 
Like a folded fan. 

See how deeply their lifted breasts 
Arc stirred! 

See how the highest leaf 
Fingers a star! 

Henry Bellamdnn 


TWO POEMS 

RECORDinON 

I have hailed you. 

Out of centuries, out of aeons, 

During this fractional part of an infinitesimal clock-tick 

of time, 
I have seen you, 
And hailed you. 

I have yearned toward you. 
Burning. 

I have looked into your eyes 

During this fractional part of an infinitesimal clock-tick 
of time. 

Quicker than the shadow of a monoplane 
Passing over the shadow of a humming-bird. 
Shall we two pass. 
And be to all men's memory 
Inconceivably remote. 

Yet it is recorded 

That out of all time, 

During this fractional part of an infinitesimal clock-tick 

of time, 
I have seen you and hailed you. 
It is recorded! 

[i6] 



 



Marx G. Sabel 



THE CORE 

I have won free of your body at last; 

The fire and ice of it 
Can neither burn nor freeze me fast. 

I look upon you now no whit 

Afraid, for I do not desire: 

And yet, what is the benefit? 

I still must worship; something higher 

Impels me youward constantly. 
Yet I am fagot for a fire 

The heat of which is of such degree 
That I shrivel painlessly therein; 
And I am flower for a sea 

So cold all things that find it win 

To death without the slightest change. 
Although I have torn the cabals of sin, 

I drift beyond the senses' range 

In spiritual perfectness 
To lands remote, grotesquely strange. 

That thrill my passions now no less 

Than even your beauty thrilled before. 
But this, this joy, is fathomless; 

More certain^ steadfast, deeper, more 

Inexorable, and it demands 
The core of what we thought the core! 

You cannot touch it with your hands, 
You cannot see it with your eyes: 

Only your soul that understands 
May teach you its divinities! 



Marx G. Sabel 



WHEN LOVE IS GONE 

I am as a field of grass 
Over which the hot winds pass — 
I am bowed. 

As an organ left alone — 
Organist and songs long gone — 
I am dumb. 

I am as a goblet dried, 
Wine-stained crystal rim and side: 
I am drained. 

As the ashes dead and gray 
When the fire has burned away, 
I am cold. 

Louise Jones 

[i8] 



 



VERSES 

IMPRESSIONS 

I feel the sands of time 
Crunch beneath my feet — 

Out on the open road 
Or in the narrow street. 

And when my heart is glad 

My foot-prints are light, 
Tracing faintly the sands 

That glitter cool and white. 

But when my soul is sad 

Heavy sinks my tread — 
Deep furrows in the dank 

Dark sands where lie the dead. 

RECOGNITION 

Disguised, a little hope 
Came to my door one day. 

And begged for food and drink, 
And pled to stay. 

Frightened, my heart said, "Wait — 

He may be born of sin.*' 
But then my soul sang out, 

"Come in, come in.** 

TWILIGHT 

The grey-cloaked dusk 

Is like a nun; 
Her hands folded. 

Her prayers done. 

In that hushed hour 

She seems to wait, 
Kneeling beside 

The convent gate. 



DEATH 

Driftwood am I, 

And oblivion seems like the sea 
That comes creeping, creeping 

Nearer to me. 

Some day a wave 

Will pass all the others by. 
And come lapping, lapping 

To where I lie. 

Then on the tide 

I shall be taken out to sea. 
Until nothing, nothing 

Is left of me. 


Eifrida De Renne Barrow 

I WONDER 

My heart is a small room, 

And life is the light of day 
That peeps in through the window 

Joyous and gay. 

When Time draws down the blind 

And leaves me to the night, 
Will God come then, I wonder, 

And bring me light? 

Eifrida De Renne Barrow 



SPRING MAKES ME WONDER 

Always my love for you 

Was an escaping thing, 

Like gray smoke seen through half-green boughs; 

Or the shadow of gray smoke wavering 

On the bare ground of spring. 

Why was it never joy — 

Clear joy of looking up 

Through drifts of porcelain-white plum-blossoms 

Into the sky*s blue cup? 

Josephine Pinckney 


POETRY; A Magazine of Verse 
MARSH SKETCHES 



SEA MARSH 



Like a woman who remembers 
Is the marsh — 

^A woman who forgives, and yet 
Whose every mood is dimmed 
Because, forgiving. 
She cannot ever quite forget. 

None knows her secret heart — 

One can but guess 

What crying winds have stirred 

To dumb distress 

Her quietness; 

What sodden rains have trampled her; 

What lust of August suns. 

She has no words: 

Impassive, inarticulate 

Save for the flight of birds — 

Slow heron, slumbrous crane — 

She keeps her counsel. 

Though cities bloom and fade 

And forests fall, 

She does not change; 

The slow years pause . . . pass. 

And leave no trace — 


Frances Dickenson Finder 



Like snowflakes on a peasant's face. 

So long 

The seasons have defrauded her, 

There is no festival 

Upon her calendar; 

In spring, no hint of welcoming 

For the few flowers 

That seek her smile; 

No song upon her lips . . . 

How should she sing? 

For nothing whole is hers. 

No perfect gift — 

Only the spent and broken things 

That drift 

In from the unrepentant sea. 



MARSH POOLS 

And now I know 

Where are those stars 

That slip like jewels 

Between the night's 

Most jealous fingers. 

At dusk I found them, 

Where the marsh had hidden them— 

In a silver pocket 

Of her grey-green gown! 

SHALLOWS 

I must swim out — 
Overlong have I stayed 
Here on the warm shale; 
Aimlessly played. ... 
Gathering sea-shells 
Empty and frail. 

One dwindles here 
Where the tides creep — 
Grows dazzled, 

Gazing too long through the clear 
Wave at the sun asleep 
On the sands overnear. . . . 
What if the thought of the deep 
Should become a fear? 

I must swim out — 
Lest the urge fail. 
Darken duskward 
And fade, as a sail. 



Frances Dickenson Finder 




TWO POEMS 



OPEN A DOOR 



Open a door suddenly. 

And you may see 
Loved ones whom you call dead 

Happy and free. 

Listen — oh, stealthily! — 

You'll find it true, 
These whom you weep for 

Are pitying you. 

Close the door softly, 

Lest they may learn 
They have been spied on, 

And never return. 

JENICE 

If Jenice dies, who is as white 

As apple blossoms blanched by night — 

If Jenice dies, what shall I care 

If there be beauty everywhere? 

All beauty will be dead for me — 

The silver moonlight on the sea, 

The shining glory of the skies, 

Will die for me if Jenice dies. 

May Thomas Milam 
TIDEWATER 

HARBOR WATER 

All through the night I can hear the sound of dancers, 
Soft-padding hoofs, and the lipping of the water, 
The water, the water patting juba , . . 

Juba! Juba! 

Juba lef arC juba right y 

Juba dance on a moonshine night — 

Juba! 

Knobbly palmetto posts. 

Matted trunks of sea-gods. 

Hairier than monkeys, rise from the water — 

The pulpy, the oily-burnished water. 

Soft rocking feet of the dancers sway about them, 
Long-swelling ripples with their crisp inhibitions. 
Filed golden streaks like the pointed feet of dancers, 
Pull of the tide, and the netted flopping motion 
Of the water, the music-woven, oily-damasked water. 
Water patting juba. . . . 

Juba! Juba! 

Juba lef an* juba rights 

Juba dance on a moonshine night — 

Juba! 


Beatrice Ravenel 

WHITE AZALEAS IN MAGNOLIA GARDENS 

Your images in water! Sea-shell gray 

And iridescence; like the endless spawn 

Of pale sea-jellies on a moonless night — . 

A milky way that glamours out of sight — 

Something of sea and something of the sky. 

Drawn from the earth as blossoming dreams are drawn. 

Most strange are you in this, that dreams alight and fly, 

But you dream on all your translucent day. 

Sweeps of divinest nothingness, abyss 
Of beauty, you are the stirred, subconscious place 
Of flowers, you are the rathe and virgin mood 
Of young azaleas. 

Where heaped branches brood 
Like bathers, water-girdled to the hips. 
Like Undines, every blossom turns her face 
Groping above the water, with her parted, winged, insati- 
able lips. 
Each for her soul and its white mysteries. 



DEW 

The new morning light is a primitive, 
A painter of faintly-filled outlines, 
A singer of folk-songs. 




 

The dew-flattened vines by my window 
Are all of one innocent green. 
Nothing so young as that ^een — 
An outline cut by a child 

From a soft new blotter. 

But when the light grows, 
They suck up a pert chiaroscuro — 
Gold, meretricious, knowing high-lights, 
Hopelessly clever. 

Their poems 
Dry in the sun. 



THE ONLY CHILD 

You are not one child only. 
Little one, daughter my dear — 

Hundreds of shadowy children 
Follow you everywhere. 

Babies in twilighted corners 
Play with your outgrown things; 

They whisper forgotten stories. 
They dance in gossamer rings. 

Hundreds of outgrown children 
Lxx)k from your candid <eyes; 


Beatrice Ravenel 



Butterfly, ceaselessly living 
In a swarming of butterflies. 

You race through the garden doorway. 
And swift, like a silvery band, 

The cobweb of children is after you . . 
But the last one holds my hand. 



LILL ANGELS 

Mammy rocks the baby 

In the wallflower-colored gloom; 
All the floor rocks with her. 

And the slumber of the room. 
Like the broad, unceasing trade-wind, 

Like the rivers underground. 
Rolls the universal rhythm 
And the rich, primeval sound: 
All de liir angels. 
All de baby's angels, 

Swingin* on de tree; 
Forty-one lill* angeP, 
Fifty-two liir angeP, 
Sixty-fo' liir anger, 
Sebbenty^Wee, . . . 

On the glory of the sundown. 
Of the wallflower-colored skies, 

I can see her vast Assumption 
In a cloud of cherubs* eyes. 
With their gold-persimnion haloes 
Where the ripest sunlight falls, 
And the cherub-tree*s espaliered 
On the winking crystal walls. 
Little y alter angels ^ 
Piccaninny angels^ 

Chuckle on the tree. 
Forty-one lilF angeF^ 
Fifty-iwo HIP angeVy 
Sixty^fo' liir anger ^ 

Se . . . ebbenty^*ree. . . . 

Beatrice Ravenel 



C30] 



 



COMMENT 

THIS SOUTHERN NUMBER 

EVER since Poetry began, it has believed in, and tried 
to encourage, a strongly localized indigenous art. 
Such art may not produce masterpieces — the gods alone 
decide that; but no one can deny that the world's most 
precious masterpieces — such things as Dante, Homer, 
Rembrandt, or the old Egyptian sculptors have left us — 
sprang out of intensely local loyalties, and attained to 
universality because the locale, grandly handled, becomes 
as wide as the earth; and a great master's neighbors, 
re-created in his art, will speak, to the end of time, for 
the whole human race. Today especially art needs to 
concentrate on the locale against the generalizing, scat- 
tering tendencies of the age; else it is in danger of becom- 
ing vague and diilused and theoretic, of losing precision 
and vitality. 

So it is consistent that we should offer our readers this 
Southern Number, and should request two leaders of the 
Poetry Society of South Carolina to share its editorship 
with our usual staff. No one can go talking about 
poetry through the states of our south-eastern coast, as 
I did a year ago, without feeling that the local loyalties, 
always dramatically intense in that r^ion, are turning 
with deep enthusiasm toward the arts. The people are 
beginning to realize what wonderful material has been 

awaiting observant eyes and creative minds: romantic 
episodes of early history and legend, involving three 
strongly contrasted races; plantation life and city life and 
sea life, with all their bewildering changes through three 
centuries of valiant history; a landscape of languorous 
beauty, melting into the vividly colored tropical ocean 
along white stretches of sand; and a proud people who 
have always commanded life a bit cavalierly, contrasted 
with the sweetly indolent, humorous, more or less loyally 
subservient African. 

All this has waited long for its interpreters, for the 
South — this particular South especially — held more firmly 
than any other section of the country to eighteenth- 
century literary manners and Victorian sentimentalities. 
Two southern poets escaped the thraldom, of course: 
Poc by sheer force of genius driven by egoistic will; and 
Lanier by good taste and a high order of poetic instinct. 
Both spent most of their lives in the neighborhood of 
Baltimore, but more tropical sojourn in the Carolinas and 
Georgia strongly influenced their imaginations. 

But Poe was an individualist rather than an interpreter; 
his high lyric strain was an intensely personal magic — 
coloraturii of surpassing brilliancy and of an exquisite 
melancholy beauty. It is as southern as Charleston's 
moss-hung "Magnolia Gardens'*; and the refuge it creates 
is as unreal, as weirdly remote from earth. While one 
should know that particular South to understand Poe's 
spiritual sources and sympathies, one sees his proud and 


This Southern Numbef 

tragic figure slip through like a ghost, haunting but 
touching not the life around him. 

Nor did Lanier attempt the story. His finely obser- 
vant mind delighted in nature, and he remains essentially 
a landscape poet; establishing, in such poems as The 
Marshes of Gfynrty the rather narrow limitations of his 
lofty spirit and delicately sensitive talent. A worshipper 
of beauty was Lanier — a true poet, but hardly a great one. 

Much remains to be said for this South in the arts. 
For a long time its people were scarcely aware of this 
fact; preoccupied with recovery from a destructive war, 
they were indiflFerent to the arts. Now theii; attitude is 
becoming expectant; they are at least preparing the way 
for the poets, painters and other artists who shall speak 
for them. Local exhibitions are being held, beautiful old 
houses are being preserved and restored; and poetry 
societies in various cities are gathering together and 
encouraging the poets who may yet immortalize their 
place and hour. 

Of these the Poetry Society of South Carolina, thus far 
the most important, is exerting an influence which may 
yet be felt throughout the South. It is appropriate that 
this society should be centralized in Charleston, for, as an 
observer said recently, 

Charleston is the logical centre for this poetical renaissance, because 
the old culture, which is the only thing capable of bringing forth the 
new, is stronger there than in any other southern city, not excepting 
Richmond. 

This society is well organized and intelligently con- 
ducted, offering the stimulus of criticism, lectures, local 
contests and prizes, with the Blindman Prize of two 
hundred and fifty dollars as an annual invitation to poets 
far and near. 

The groups in Columbia, Savannah and Jacksonville 
are near neighbors of the Charleston society, and closely 
affiliated with it. Its example has been felt as far away 
as the Lone Star State, for the Poetry Society of Texas, 
with similar aims, is being organized by Mrs. Therese 
Lindsey, of Houston, and others. Texas indeed has been 
keenly hospitable to modern poets and the ideas they 
represent; many of the more prominent ones are familiar 
figures in Dallas, Austin, Waco, San Antonio and other 
cities. 

The present number attempts to represent the south- 
eastern groups — of the Carolinas, Georgia and Florida. 
The poems which we print by Mr. Heyward and Mr. 
Allen come, with one exception, from their projected 
book of Carolina Chansons y to be published next autumn; 
which will endeavor to remind their neighbors, and those 
further north as well, of the heroic history and romantic 
legendry of this region, much of which will fade from 
human memory unless the poets make it live. 

H. M. 




Poetry South 

POETRY SOUTH 

It is a truism that creative art from its very nature 
must be original, the peculiarly different and unexpected 
reaction of the artist to his environment. This is es- 
pecially true of poetry, the least concrete of the arts; and 
it is this very quality of unexpectedness in the poet, 
constituting as it does so much of the charm of poetry, 
that makes an attempt to forecast the reactions of any 
group or school of poets a task which calls for the prophetic 
rather than for the merely constructive critic. 

Nevertheless, poets as a rule are so profoundly affected 
by their environment that by understanding it, if we can- 
not precisely predict their reactions, we can at least say 
within limits what they will not write about, and perhaps 
even be able to forecast the general tendencies of a school 
or group in its day and place. If, in addition to the 
physical environment, we have also some grasp of the 
historical and ethnic background from which poets speak, 
some comprehension of the immediate social and local 
problems which surround them — in short, some knowledge 
of the poets themselves — we shall be able, to a large extent, 
to tell not only what subjects they will be most likely to 
select, but also, in a more limited sense, in what mood 
they will approach their theme; and from mood their style, 
for it is mood that dictates style. 

It is from this standpoint of physical and spiritual 
environment, from the historical background, and from 

a survey of the tendencies evident in the verse being 
written by southern poets today, that this cursory presen- 
tation of the condition of poetry in the South is attempted. 
In so brief a space its statements must be rather general, 
with all the many exceptions implied. 

Despite some vigorous assertions to the contrary, it 
seems as if southern poetry were going to be decidedly 
regional in spirit, with a quick human appeal but strongly 
local in tone — poetry of and about places. Much of 
American verse is city poetry. It is the similarity of 
our city life perhaps which has given to a great deal of 
American verse a note of sameness that is too often mis- 
taken for a universal realistic appeal. The city, too, has 
given American poetry a tendency to mirror back the 
drab, and accentuated an almost morbid desire for self- 
esqpression which the crowd begets. There has been, to 
be sure, a gain in thought-content and sophistication, 
but the spontaneous and simple have been sacrificed, 
while the constant search for the "new" has brought 
about a ceaseless experiment with alien forms. It seems 
probable that poetry written from the South will be, in 
nearly all these respects, the opposite of what has rather 
arbitrarily been called "city-verse," for the South is still 
predominantly agricultural. Although industrialism, un- 
der the spur of northern capital, has ridden in ruthlessly 
here and there, the plantation of one kind or another is 
still the economic, vital unit; and it may be expected that 
when the plantation poet speaks, it will not be from the 


Poetry South 

necessity of introspectively asserting his existence as an 
individual apart from the crowd, but of objectively 
reflecting in simple measures the patriarchal life remnant 
about him. In this he will very likely be profoundly 
impressed by his sub-tropical or mountain landscapes, 
and reflect the spontaneously lyrical and primarily 
rhythmic melodies of the Negro. Indeed, the effect of 
the Negro on southern poetry demands a treatment by 
itself. 

It is significant that the syncopation of the Negro, 
which has found its way into "jazz" music and verse, 
has seldom been adopted by southern poets. This is 
partly due to a "subconscious-intellectual" color-line, for 
strong social and racial prejudices are carried over into 
art; but to a still greater extent the omission of "jazz" in 
southern poetry is due to the fact that the short, choppy 
eflFects of syncopated rhythms do not lend themselves to 
the intimate mood of memory and contemplation which 
the South has to express. Therefore, the more obvious 
employment of Negro rhythms, and the attempts to gain 
the ear by poems in unauthentic dialect must not be 
overestimated. Due credit must be given, however, to 
the Valentine Museum of Richmond for its publication 
of authentic Negro dialect-poetry, and its experiments 
in recording for phonographic reproduction the exact 
sound of the passing speech of the old Negro. Thomas 
Nelson Page of Virginia, Harry Stillwell Edwards and 
Joel Chandler Harris of Georgia, and Janie Screven Hey- 

ward of the South Carolina coast country, together with 
a few others, are deserving of mention for having created 
literature which correctly records the Negro dialect of 
their own localities. 

The southern muse must be careful how she handles 
the tar-baby; but the weird, the bizarre and the gro- 
tesque in Negro life and story, and the tone of the 
"spiritual" will have to be reckoned with — indeed, they 
have already made themselves felt. With the N^ro, 
poetry, music and the dance are still closely associated, 
as in all primitive races, and in the recognition and per- 
petuation of this condition lies a great opportunity for 
American art in the South. It is much to be desired 
that the southern group may recognize this immense fund 
of rich material for poetry which Negro music, legends and 
folk-lore hold in trust, and that the time may rapidly 
come when there will be Negro poets who can use ad- 
equately the artistic values inherent in their own race, 
and produce something worthy. Unfortunately Paul 
Lawrence Dunbar stands almost alone; his was a unique 
contribution to literature, as Tanner's has been to painting. 

The Negro, however, is not the only source of folk-lore 
in the South. Even richer in poetic material is the lofty 
back-country of the Appalachians. The rush of Ameri- 
can civilization has thus far touched only the fringes of 
this rugged land. Today one may take a trail from one 
of the mountain towns, and by traveling horseback for 
fifty miles in from the railroad he will discover for him- 


Poetry South 

self an eighteenth-century pioneer settlement; provided 
he is not mistaken for a revenue officer, and his route 
subjected to an immediate change of destination. 

The mountains of the Carolinas and Kentucky were 
settled in the days of Daniel Boone and earlier by sturdy 
Scotch-Irish and English pioneers who built their isolated 
settlements behind the ramparts of rock. There, se- 
questered from the flow and change of civilization, they 
have continued to live the life of the pioneer. There are 
certain remote districts in the Black and Great Smoky 
ranges where life has remained absolutely static for a 
century and a half. There it is still possible to hear old 
English ballads and folk-tales which passed from current 
use generations ago; and one still encounters Elizabethan 
words. Certainly nowhere else in the America of today 
can one find conditions so favorable to the development 
of genuine folk-expression; with the background of an 
old, but still remembered civilization, and an absolute 
isolation which encourages the crystallization, by word of 
mouth, of the idea into the story. 

The mountaineer responds but little to beauty. In his 
great tumble of hills, which contains forty-six peaks of 
over six thousand feet, including the highest point east 
of the Rocky Mountains, amid a flora that is bewildering 
in its pageantry of color, he is stubborn, vindictive in 
anger, elemental as a child in his amusements, shrewd, 
silent, and unerring in his estimate of the "furreners'' 
he may chance to meet. It should be added here, by way 

of extenuation, that the mountaineer is naturally on the 
defensive. Living as he does by a code of ethics and 
morals out of the past, he finds himself contending with 
the incursions of the present, and he knows instinctively 
that he is at a disadvantage. 

But it is among the mountdn women that one finds 
the pathos and tragedy of these isolated people. Burden- 
bearers, tillers of the soil, the women are old at thirty. 
Their faces tell nothing of their thoughts, but there is 
always a characteristic quality to the speaking voice: 
the tone is low, soft and drawling, invariably dropping 
to a lower key at the end of every remark, with an effect 
of hopelessness and infinite sadness. 

The only emotional outlet for the mountaineer is the 
religious revival, and the occasional neighborhood dance. 
To both of these forms of entertainment he responds with 
the greatest gusto, and the extreme revivalist sects, such 
as the "Holiness" and the "Holy Rollers," have made 
many profitable excursions into his fastnesses. But such 
outbursts can not long combat the native reticence of 
the people, and they soon become self-conscious and 
indifferent. 

In spite of the fact that the southern mountaineer is 
probably the most interesting and least known figure in 
our national life, it will be many years before he will 
write his own story, if ever. The lack of schools, and his 
rooted indifference to educational advantages, will keep 
him much as he is, but he should be transcribed through 


Poetry South 

the medium of some art before he passes; for there is 
nothing else quite like him on the continent. 

The statement has been made earlier that southern 
poetry may be largely of and about places. If environ- 
ment is going to affect our southern poets, if they are 
going to be at all objective, this will necessarily follow, 
for there is no other portion of the country. so districted — 
i. e., where sections differ so one from the other as in the 
South. To pass from the country of the mountain-whites 
to the Carolina Low Country, for example, is to pass 
from one world to another, one with a di£ferent fauna and 
flora and a different ethnic background. Here the poets 
may tell of the sea-islands, with tidal lagoons where the 
wild-fowl, ducks, marsh-hens, and strange gawky heron 
feed, and the migrating song-birds pass through each 
year like a recurring flame. They may speak of magnolia 
and azalea gardens, oriental in a polychromatic spring; 
of swamps and eerie live-oak forests where the Spanish 
moss hangs like stalactites in twilit caverns; of the miles 
of deserted rice-fields where turbaned blacks walk ruined 
dykes; and of the ancient baronies and manors, each with 
its legend, where the deer feed around the stately columned 
houses — ^shells of a life and an epoch which have passed 
away. 

But if the past does not call the southern poet, the 
thrusting of industrialism into the Piedmont cotton and 
tobacco regions, with the rise of the factory system, 
child-labor, and a burning racial problem, o£fer a tre- 




 

mendous « theme and a possible chance of legitimate 
propaganda for the present. Then in Florida, at such 
towns as Miami, a frontier is being peacefully settled, 
and dotted with villas Roman in their scale and mag- 
nificence; while from the Everglades the firelight of the 
stone-age Seminole glows in the midnight sky when he 
holds his secret corn-dances. Southward stretch the coral 
keys, haunted by huge sea-turtles, that crawl out to hide 
their eggs where pirates once hid gold; and even today 
the eagle boat of the whiskey-runner shelters there, 
making for Nassau or Bimini. Then there are the plains 
of Texas rich with the diisty-golden dreams of Spanish 
. empire, with enchanted mesas, pueblos, Indian stories 
and cow-boy songs; or the cane-brakes of Louisiana, and 
faded Creole New Orleans of the old river days. 

How absurd to say the South has nothing but genealogy ! 
Who will sing of them, these cities — of Santa Fe or El 
Paso, San Antonio or St. Augustine, and of old Charleston 
with her three hundred years of memories? Who is 
going to write the epos of Coronado, of the lost Fountain 
of Youth, of De Soto, of the pirates, of Africa trans- 
planted, of the outlandish voodoo that still lingers, and 
of the strange new Christ the Negroes worship? Is there 
no one who will tell over again from the clearer light of a 
better time how the awful, keen sword of civil war struck 
down these states, how the slave and freedman passed, 
and how through bitterness they have come to a saner, 
sweeter life again? Here is a challenge to the American 


Poetry South 

renascence. It is ardently to be hoped that the South 
will continue to reply to it as she has begun to do, and 
that she will give us largely of her rich landscapes and 
historical material, and speak of and from the life of her 
memory and of her present. And it is also to be hoped 
that the cleverly inane, or the small accidental dream-life 
of the individual, so seldom worth uttering — tiny loves 
and smaller hates, and the baldly phrased usual; above 
all, the banal echo and the purely sentimental — will be 
left unsaid. 

Faked sympathy, and crocodile tears for the past, are 
the stops which the southern poets must most carefully 
avoid. Unfortunately, the vox humana, pulled out full, is 
still good for a round of applause almost anywhere, but 
in the South there is an inherited bias in its favor. 

In colonial times no other section of the country was so 
much affected by the eighteenth-century classical school 
as the South, particularly the Carolinas and Virginia. 
New England seems to have preserved and perpetuated, 
almost down to modern times, the spirit of the Puritan 
seventeenth-century literature, but in the South your 
Cavalier gendeman imported his advance leaves of the 
"latest books published in the United Kingdom," had 
them specially bound, added his book-mark; and read his 
Pope, his Johnson, and his Goldsmith, not always his 
Burke, with complete satisfaction. Education and plan- 
tation tutoring were largely in the dead languages; and in 
South Carolina the old Huguenot French stock read the 

French Bible, Voltaire or Rousseau according to their 
generation. Nowhere was the eflFect upon originality of 
style more blighting. Almost until the civil war the 
couplet of Pope held fall sway — the English romantic 
movement seems to have had little effect upon it; verse 
remained an accomplishment of the idle and the polite, 
extremely sentimental and absolutely eighteenth-century 
in style. Even today the old idea that there is a distinct 
poetic jargon persists in the South, and realism in poetry 
shocks the academic sense, while in files of old newspapers 
and privately printed books that throng second*hand 
book-stalls these old voices still tinkle from the dust in 
their endless couplets. In the aggregate an astonishing 
amount of such verse was written. Take General Albert 
Pike's Hymns to the GodSy for instance; and William 
Gilmore Simms, who heads the list with eighteen volumes. 
How many single poems survive today? 

Poe stands out from this crowd of gentlemen poetasters 
as the great exception. He actually developed his own 
forms, not turning to new forms but improving on the 
old. He reflected the life about him; for his poems are 
much more biographical than is generally suspected, and 
most of his verse shows strong southern influence in 
landscape and rhythms. Nevertheless, he also did not 
escape tradition entirely, and partly for that reason he 
seems more European now than American, but none the 
less great for that. 

It took the civil war to goad southern poets into an 


Poetry South 

authentic local utterance, although there were a few years, 
just before 1861, when it seemed as if the Charleston 
group — ^Hayne, Timrod, Simms, and some others — would 
make that city a southern literary capital. A magazine, 
RusselFsy was started there under much the same kind 
of impulse as the Atlantic Monthly; but Sumter was fired 
on, and the war put a period to all such activity. Both 
Hayne and Timrod dealt with landscapes and nature, 
but they are chiefly remembered for their war poems, 
and because, with a very few others, they were the only 
voices which to any degree adequatdy phrased the despair 
of reconstruction. Timrod once wrote to Hayne: "I can 
embody it all in a few words — beggary, starvation, death, 
bitter grief, utter want of hope." It is impossible to 
judge men writing under such conditions by the ordinary 
standards of criticism. The wonder that they wrote at 
all is only transcended by the miracle that they also 
achieved some memorable lines. 

Art, as it is the finest expression of the life of a people, 
is the last thing to recover from the ravages of war. 
Reconstruction, with its spiritual and economic despair, 
put a gag in the mouths of singers; the few voices that did 
speak were more like croaks than songs. However, one 
ludicrous little man by the name of Coogler, in Columbia, 
S. C, conferred five volumes upon a faintly amused world: 

Maude — for her gentle name was Maude — 
Wore many smiles, and diey were sad; 

A thousand virtues she possessed. 
Many of which I never had. 

This, in its own way, is really great, and the last two 

lines could have stood truthfiilly for the relation 

of the southern poet of that time to his muse; for these 

were the days when prejudices, and the heritage of war, 

were too strong to permit of literature being written. 

Shakespeare himself would have been taboo on account 

of the Dark Lady of the Sonnets. That Sidney Lanier 

should have spoken out of this environment is all the more 

wonderful. He was indeed a protest against his age 

north and south: 

O Trade! OTradel would thou wert dead! 
The time needs heart— 'ds tired of head. 

Like Poe he developed his own style and theory of verse, 
and was not content simply to use the old forms as Hayne 
an4 Timrod had done. His knowledge of the two arts 
of music and verse largely made this possible. Lanier 
was too modern in one sense for his time, and too con- 
servative for the moderns. He worked against frightful 
physical and spiritual odds, in the seventies and eighties, 
and despite it all at times achieved great beauty. He 
and Poe are, of course, the great names the South has to 
oflFer to American poetry. Madison Cawein should not 
be forgotten. These men overcame literary taboos and 
traditions, and dared to have personality; with them 
poetry was not simply polite. 

The last few years have brought a new spirit into the 
South. With the recovery of her economic life has come 
the possibility of renewing the old culture, and an oppor- 


Poetry South 

tunity for a leisure not due to apathy and despair. The 
great war has also stirred and disturbed her subtly and 
immeasurably, till a vast territory which has for a while 
lain poetically fallow is now awakening, and from here 
and there voices, small and inadequate perhaps, but never- 
theless earnest and distinctive voices, are giving it 
utterance. 

It is their desire that the rest of the country know and 
recognize this; for while these voices may utter with a 
timbre peculiarly their own, it is because they are moved, 
not by a provincial pride, but by the renascence of poetry 
throughout America; and being so moved by this spirit, 
they claim to be of it. The South will never express 
itself in constricted forms; mood, inclination and tradi- 
tion forbid, nor does it feel the urge completely to slough 
the old. Here, where the tides of immigration have 
brought no alien tongues, the grand tradition of English 
poetry still lingers strongly in an old culture which has 
survived the wrack of civil war and of reconstruction — 
a European culture, planted by a strong stock in colonial 
times; and it is from this tradition and from the descend- 
ants of that stock that the southern poetical renascence 
must come. It will accept with modern spirit the new 
forms in verse, but accept them as being valuable for their 
loosening effect upon the old rather than as being all 
satisfactory in themselves; and it brings to American 
poetry a little known but tropically rich store of material, 
an unurbanized beauty, the possibility of legend, folk- 


POETRY; A Magazine of Verse 

song, romance, historical narrative, glorious landscape, 
and an untired mood; in short, a content which will save 
it from that sure sign of literary inadequacy, a too nice 
preoccupation with form. 

Hervey Allen and DuBose Hey ward 

POE IN SOUTH CAROLINA 

In May, 1828, Poe enlisted in the army under the name 
of Edgar A. Perry, and was assigned to Battery "H" of 
the First Artillery at Fort Independence. In October 
his" battery was ordered to Fort Moultrie, Charleston, 
S. C. Poe spent a whole year on Sullivan's Island. 
Professor C. Alphonso Smith, the well-known Poe author- 
ity, says: "So far as I know, this was the only tropical 
background that Poe had ever seen." That the sus- 
ceptible nature of the young poet was vastly impressed by 
the weirdness and melancholy scenery of the Carolina 
coast country, there can be little doubt. The dank tarns 
and funereal woodlands of his landscapes, or at least a 
strong suggestion of them, may all be found here. The 
scene of The Goldbug is definitely laid on Sullivan's 
Island; and here are dim family vaults and tracts of 
country in which the House of Usher might well stand. 

Dim vales and shadowy floods 
And cloudy-looking woods. 
Whose forms we can't discover, 
From the tears that drip all over — 

was written while Poe was in the army at Fort Moultrie, 

 



 



Poe in South Carolina 

and appeared in his second volume in 1829. There are 
later echoes: 

Around by lifting winds forgot, 

Resignedly beneath the sky> 

The melancholy waters lie. 

H.A, 
REVIEWS 

A SONNETEER 

Poemsy by Stewart Mitchell. Duffield and Co. 

The sonnet in our time occupies a lonely and illusory 
pinnacle. Due to the obsolescence of other imposed 
verse-patterns, it is mistakenly considered a special 
province of poetic art, which it is not. It may be an 
important form only by virtue of its history: it is perhaps 
the only purely romantic system which has become 
entirely acclimated; in periods of great fecundity in our 
literature it has had the cry of fashion; it has attracted 
profound and celebrated writers. Sequences of sonnets 
have been substituted for that anom^y of our art, the 
long lyric, as in Christina Rossetti's Later Life and 
Donne's Holy Sonnets y probably the best we have. It 
is fortunately based on a ten-syllable line peculiarly 
pleasant in the English tongue. Within it one can 
experiment, as the Elizabethans did, in complex passions 
and subtle argument properly dramatic. It may be 
made the journal of an introspective or passionate life, 
as in Mr. Blunt's Proteus and Esther sequences. But 

its possible rhymes are easily exhaustible in our language, 
and thereafter reminiscent. Unlike its musical name- 
sake, the sonata, there is no esoteric logic or balance to 
govern it. Other forms, such as the sestina, may set 
a pace for more varied music. I suspect its present 
dismal distinction is due in part to the mere fact of its 
obsolescence. Modern sonnets are many, and usually 
mediocre. Each new bundle arouses one's hope: "Here, 
after all, at last, may be the real thing." 

One's hope is not altogether dashed by Stewart 
Mitchell's book, which contains about two dozen, although 
he does not invent a new music, or trouble the old un- 
subtle cadence. The effect, never achieved by this poet, 
of a truly great sonnet like Donne's Death Be Not Proud 
is produced by the clash of a surging internal movement 
upon or against the rigid scheme. Among contemporaries 
Miss Millay will best bear comparison with her masters 
in this respect. Sonneteers like Mitchell write too much 
"in the pattern," with a resultant tonal emptiness, or 
invirility. 

His art rather reeks of the intellect. Vision and pas- 
sion are strained through nets of speculation and sieves 
of analysis. Nothing actually escapes, or would seem 
quite to satisfy him. That any trace of ecstasy is hard 
to identify may be because he makes the mistake of 
codification inaccurately associated with the^» de siicle — 
with Ernest Dowson, the original work of that subtle 
translator Arthur Symons, et al. When human affairs 

[so] 



 



A Sonneteer 

are generalized into "parched desire," "redolent 
splendor," "pitiless fates," etc., the odd commonplace 
holds true that identity, force and conviction go out of 
them. Modes of thought and address, "preserved" 
as fruit is preserved, tend to limit the precision of verse 
as a means of communication. "The conditions of life 
pre-determined slavery to be easy and freedom hard," 
says Marianne Moore. One wearies, to the point of fury, 
of this brand of expressivism: 

Bring me, this evening, crimson wine 

Such as in twilight seems to keep 
Secrets of death in serpentine 

Sinuous sleep. 

At its best, however, this book is not an arid field for 
those who prefer the rewards of a discreet cultivated 
mind to the glare and quaver of more fickle if stronger 
imaginations. Glenway Wescott 

A FRENCH VICTORIAN 

Plays of Edmond Rostand^ translated by Henderson 
Daingerfield Norman. Illustrated by Ivan Glidden. 
Macmillan Co. 

In spite of certain confusions of idiom, this is a rather 
spirited translation of the most popular French play- 
wright of his day. It rhymes almost as lightly and easily 
as the original, and has a similar slam-bang movement, 
and the same flavor and color of swashbuckling, noisy 

romance. Rostand "put it over" adroitly with the 
crowd, almost persuaded his audiences that VAiglon 
was tragedy and Cyrano high comedy; and now that he 
is dead we have him Englished in extenso^ and majestically 
enthroned in an octavo edition, with illustrations of a 
naive sentimentality worthy of 1850. 

But already the tinsel is tarnished, and the loud fame 
of the dead poet slinks around the corner into the past. 
These plays, though of French origin, seem as Victorian 
as The Princess — they bear no relation to modern poetic 
or theatric art. 

The translator, in his preface, is at some pains to 
explain the meaning of Chantecler^ that subliminal 
mystery: "Like so much great poetry," he says, "its 
application is at once local and universal." We refer the 
faithful to his guidance; if anyone has failed to under- 
stand Chanteclery now is the time for enlightenment. 

"He meant much to the French," remarks one who 
knows them. Yes, he stressed certain conventions, 
certain traditions, as dear to the hearts of Frenchmen 
as the pioneer-cowboy convention, stressed by Service 
et al., is to our own. That he should further artifi- 
cialize these conventions was inevitable — a temperament 
of such romantic ardor must glamourize and melodrama- 
tize, must repay not only principal but interest. The 
public is always grateful for this service — great was 
Rostand's reward in his day. But the day was short — 
already it is a quaint yesterday. H. M. 


CORRESPONDENCE 

NOTES FROM THE P. S. JL. ANNUAL DINNER 

"Which way to the dinner?" we asked of the doorman 
at the Hotel Astor. 

" Which dinner do you want to go to ? ** he said, unrolling 
a long scroll; "the Shoe-lace and Ribbon Manufacturers' 
banquet, the wedding on the ninth floor . . . ?" 

"The Poetry dinner,'* we told him. 

"Central ballroom straight ahead." 

Stopped by a jazz band and loud applause, we asked 
again if that was the Poetry dinner. No, we were told, 
that was the Flower and Feather Manufacturers' banquet. 
The Poets' opened with organ music — their music was 
over. Centre door straight ahead. 

Yes, music for a long time was over — through a redun- 
dant parade of meats and sauces, and the polite murmur 
of poets and friends of poets; broken now and then by 
loud clapping from without, perhaps from the hip flasks 
of the Flower and Feather Manufacturers of America. 

A guest at the table where we sat, an army captain, 
suddenly wished the dinner might be reported as Rabelais 
would have done it. We wished so too, though it seemed 
a petition for the moon. If Rabelaisian eyes and ears were 
there, what could they do but sleep beneath so decorous 
a murmur of two hundred and fifty poets and friends of 
poets, all in standardized evening array? 

Readings and speeches, and more speeches: in which 
we were told that poetry in the last twenty years had 
become a practical traditional force in the life of America, 
that the Poetry Society of America was starting young 
poets on the right road, creating a more catholic art 
(" In fact anything now is poetry," one speaker permittqil 
himself to say), was breaking down the standardized 
patterns, giving the individual a show, making the country 
safe for poetry, turning out vital, valiant, normal, prac- 
tical poets; that the poets were too humble; that we live 
in a glorious age for poets; that they are a force for good 
against preachers, reformers, business men . . • etc., etc. 
In the course of which one was glad to meet refreshing 
honesty in the Nebraskan voice of Edwin Ford Piper, 
light skill in the humoresques of Wallace Irwin, flame in 
the rhymes of John V. A. Weaver. 

And in the five-hour program there were three numbers 
in higher relief, moments of waking for any Rabelais 
present — those of Chang Peng Chun, Amy Lowell, and 
Carl Sandburg. 

Early in the evening Chang Peng Chun brought a 
stillness into the room, a brief mood of contemplation. 
He wondered if American poetry today was just ^'a 
passing phase of trenchant curiosity, or the poetry of 
power, poignancy and mist." To the Chinese, he said, 
poetry meant something '* leisurely, unhurried, seriously 
seeking the depths, enjoying the feeling of pain-happi- 
ness." He thought of it as an art that might bring about 


Notes from the P, S. A. Annual 'Dinner 

in this country a new way of judging values — according 
to human satisfaction and not material gain; it might 
correct the evils of mechanization. He ended on an 
evidently bitter note — a hope that "China might be 
made a paradise for China, and not for pirates and 
profiteers." He gave these as classic definitions: 

Poetry is like the sound of the rhythm in the void; is like the color 
in phenomena; is like the moon in the water; the image in the mirror. 
There is an end in words, but the meaning will waft on forever. 

Two hours more of speakers, and Miss Lowell rose, and 
curdled some of the guests by the acid of her anathema 
against the trend of the evening. With the one Chinese 
exception, she damned it as a kind of benefit performance, 
"a phonograph repeating encores." She called for "the 
sharp clash of critical emotional insight;" but in vain 
that evening. 

At length at midnight Carl Sandburg did what seemed 
beyond doing — brought a maimed and dying audience 
to life again by magnets of the art which after all they 
must have come for. The room at last began to take 
on an air of enjoyment, extending even to the two sur- 
viving head-waiters in the wings. The definitions he 
submitted stood beside those fished from Chinese lore: 
poetry — "a mystic sensuous mathematics of fire, smoke- 
stacks, wafHes, pansies, people, and purple sunsets; a 
kinetic arrangement of static syllables; the capture of a 
picture, a song or a flair in a deliberate prism of words." 
The mathematics of a long deliberate supple poem, The 

Windy Cityy held his audience through its number of 
changing themes — a far blend, annealed in music, of 
movement, color, noise, mood, shape and fact; likely 
to baffle critics who label this poet as either "lyrical" 
or "rugged." Three songs to a guitar — one of them Jay 
GouU^s Daughter^ an ironic railroad caprice — perhaps 
lightened the intensity of this number, and perhaps deep- 
ened it. 

An hour of values contemplative and exciting, to four 
hours of futility ! An unfair ratio, it seemed to some of us. 

Dorothy Dudley 



IMPORTS FROM AFRICA 

To the Editor: Speaking of your Southern Number, 
have you seen the Imports from Africa contributed 
recently to The Reviewer^ of Richmond, Va., by Mrs. 
Julia M. Peterkin, who lives on an old plantation near 
Fort Motte, S. C. ? Here is one of these Negro carvings 
—it's called The Plat-eye: 

£f you trabble roun* at night, 'specially in de spring, endurin' de 
small o' de moon, you mor'n likely to see a plat-eye. Long up yonder 
by Gilliken's sto' at de ben' o' de road close by de two notch mile pos', 
a lil dog'll come a runnin' up by you an' kinder rub hisse'f up on you 
leg. You shoot at em, an' it'll tu'n to a hawg. You shoot 'em agin 
an' it'll tu'n to a boss. Shoot em agin, an' it'll tu'n to a man 'thout 
no head. But you keep on ashootin' an' it'll tu'n to a fog, jus' somep'n 
nother kinder like a cloud. Den you run. A cowardly man don' 
tote no break bones. 


Imports from Africa 

The Negroes on Lang Syne Plantation are in straight 
descent from the first arrivals. Mrs. Peterkin is listen- 
ing in on some rich folk-lore. C S. 

NOTES 

The May number of Poetry will be issued from a different address, 
232 East Erie Street. Our new office will be a few blocks north-east of 
the present one; being across North Michigan Avenue, and a quarter of 
a mile nearer Lake Michigan. 

We hope that our friends, new and old, will find us no less accessible 
and hospitable than we have endeavored to be in the abode which has 
sheltered us since Poethy began. "Flve-forty-three Cass Street" has 
become an important part of our history, and we hope that the bright 
south room in Erie Street will welcome as many guests and gather as 
many memories. 

Mr. DuBose Hey ward, of Charleston, who is secretary and one of the - 
founders of the Poetry Society of South Carolina, has been a contributor 
to Poetry and other magazines. Together with Mr. Hervey Allen, he 
will publish next autumn a book of local ballads and descriptive pieces, 
Carolina Chansons. 

Beatrice Ravenel (Mrs. Francis G.), of Charleston, S. C, is a well- 
known contributor to this magazine and others; a writer of stories as 
well as verse. 

Mr. Marx G. Sabel, of Jacksonville, Fla., also requires no introduc- 
tion to our readers. Nor does Miss Josephine Pinckney of Charleston, 
or Mr. Henry Bellamann, of Columbia, S. C, author of /f Music- 
Uacher*s Note-Book (N. Y. Poetry Book-shop). 

The other contributors appear for the first time in this magazine: 

Mr. Hervey Allen, of Charleston, is the author of Wampum and Old 
Goldy recently published by the Yale University Press in the YaU Series 
of Younger Poets. 

Mrs. Frances Dickenson Pinder, a member, like Mr. Sabel, of the 
Round Table group at Jacksonville, Fla., has contributed verse and 
prose to various magazines. 

May Thomas Milam (Mrs. J. C.)> of Atlanta, Ga.« has also contributed 
to the magazines. 

Elfrida De Renne Barrow (Mrs. Craig B.), a member of the Prosodists 
group in Savannah, Ga., has published little as yet. Ditto Miss Louise 
Jones, who was last year a student at the University of South Carolina 
in Columbia. 

BOOKS RECEIVED 

ORIGINAL verse: 

Collected Poems of James Ehroy Flecker. Edited, with an introduction, 

by J. C. Squire. Alfred A. Knopf. 
Epitaphs^ by Lady Margaret Sackville. William Brown, Edinburgh. 
The Rainbow* s Fooi, by Julius W. Muller. Priv. prt'd. New York. 
VagraniSy by Georgia E. Bennett. Ralph Fletcher Seymour. 
The Land oj Beginning Again^ by Louisa Fletcher. Small, Maynard & 

Co. 
The Blue-'Dragon Ballads, by Alfred James Fritchey. Privately printed, 

Los Angeles. 
Feils qf Samite, by J. Corson Miller. Small, Maynard & Co. 
The Magpie's Shadow, by Yvor Winters. Musterbook IL Muster- 

bookhouse, Chicago. 
masques: 
The Land qf the Aiouwas, by Edwin Ford Piper. Midland Press, Iowa 

City, la. 
The Masque oS Morning and Other Poems, by Edward Viets. Four 

Seas Co. 
anthologies: 
Modem Verse, British and American, edited by Anita P. Forbes. Henry 

Holt & Co. 
Anthology qfMagaune Verse Jor 1921; edited by William Stanley Braith- 

waite. Small, Maynard & Co. 
A Little Book qf Verse, Peabody High School. Press of Thomas Siviter 

& Co., Pittsburgh, Pa. 
translations: 
The Koksar qf the Ukraine, ky Taras Shevchenko, Done in English 

Verse by Alex. Jardine Hunter. Priv. pr'td, Teulon, Man., Canada. 


WE ARE IN THE MARKET FOR 



GREETING CARD VERSE SUITABLE 



FOR ALLOCCASIONSXHRISTMAS 



VALENTINE DAYEASTER^MOTHERS 
DAY ETC.PEACH VERSE MUST 



BE BRIEF-NOT MORE THAN SIX 



OR EIGHT LINES- AND MUST 



CONTAIN A DEFINITE MESSAGE? 



NO GENERALITIES . HOWEVER 



GLAMOROUS OR GLITTERINC« 



B» HEADS IN THE CLOUDS IF YOU 



WISH.BUT FEET ON THE EARTH 



ATALLTIMES..PBE SIMPLE 



HUMAN, IMAGINATIVE AND 



APPEALINO.P PROMPT CONSIDs 



ERATION AND REMUNERATION. 



PRVOLLAND COMPANY 



58E Washington Street ,Chica^o 



 



We Are Backing the Pods— ^w*^ 
cfctfua a u Are You Backing Us? 

For a verse-writer to be printed in POETRY is about the 

most honorable of recognitions. 

F$rd Mad9x Huifftr in the New Y$rk 
Evening Past Literary Review. 

This monthly publication is an exhibition of literary faith 
and bravery that belong to the heroic age. 

The Daily Journal, East St. L$uis. 

The varied interest and beauty presented are typical of 
POETRY'S quality. Thanks to a rare coincidence of 
poise and generous imagination, of sense and sensitiveness, 
it ranks easily as the best vehicle of poetry in the English 
language. 

From an idit$rial in thi New York Sunday Tribune. 

POETRY has become a significant force 
in the intellectual life of America. That 
astute observer, the late William Marion 
Reedy, wrote: **Probably Miss Monroe has 
done more for the high art of song than any 
other person in the United States'* — a state- 
ment which has been generously supported 
by other commentators of similar prestige. 

POETRY: A Magazine of Verse 
543 Cau St., Chicago 

Enclosed find $3.00 (Canada, $3.15; foreign, $3.25) 
for one year's subscription to POETRY. 

Beginning 

Name 

Address 



 



Special Offer to Subscribers 

For an Even FOUR DOLLARS 

sent for a new subscription or a renewal, you may have 

POETRY for one year (price $3.00), and 
THE NEW POETRY— An Anthology 

(Macmillan Co. — $2.25 postpaid), a representative col- 
lection of contemporary verse, selected by the editors of this 
mag^ine. The latest edition contains a revised, up-to-date 
bibUography. 

"For the envisioning of the range of the 'new poetry/ and a com- 
parison of its diversities, there is no other collection that compares 
with this anthology." — Rewvf of Review. 

**Tht intfXKluction of this anthology gives a most enlightening 
discussion of the development and tendencies of the so-calttd 'new 
poetry.' "—Frpm the classified list of coniemporarf poets eomj^ed 
by Anne Morris Boyd, AM,, B,LS,, Instructor in the Umverstty of 
Illinois Library School, 

A university professor of English, one of many whose classes use 
THE nEW POETRY as a textbook, writes: 

"It is quite the thing I have been looking for this many a day." 

Or, add $2.25 to the retail price of any book of con- 
temporary verse on the lists of the following publishers:— 
Thb Macmillan Co., Hbnry Holt & O)., Mftchbll 
Kbnnbrlby, Gbo. H. Doran Co., John Lanb Co., Thb 
Cbntury Co., G. P. Putnam's Sons, Richard G. 
Badger, Sherman French & Co. and The Four Seas 
Co, 

You will get the book postpaid and a year's subscription 
to the magazine. 

Send your order at once to 
POETRY - - 543 Cass St., Chicago 



 



AT HOME AND FOUNTAIN 

B^suRErris 



« 



Horlick's" 

Tie Original 
Ma ^d Milk 



The Food-drink For All Ages 

REFRESHES INVIGORATES 

FINEST QUALITY 



BOaND VOLUMES 
of POETRY 

Gmiplete volumes of POETRY bound in buckram with 

Index and Tide Page 
Vol. 1— October, 1912 (Reprint) to March, 1913.... $2.75 

AU Other Volumes, .II-XVIII, each 2.00 

The bound volumes of POETRY make a well-nigfa com- 
plete collect*' n r" the best verse written in English since 



1912 



1^' 

. Jindir/ rkis 

'' a I crib f 
x^cf .$tt 
irders) 



o library should be without Uiem. 

p Ag advancid to more than tunce what wi originaily 
f scarcely higher than actual cost to us. Therefore it 
age or expressage^ which will be extra. Each volume 
^ pounds. 

ka^fe tk$ir eivn c$piei ef POBTRT beund f§r the 

Jihg t§ the binder's bill (S1.80 §r mere fer special 

f they return t§ us cepies in perfect cenditien, nve 



nvill set iv velumes fer Si.60 each. 



POETRY 



543 CASS STREET 



 



Vol. XX 



!AY 1 



No. II 




A Magazine of Verse 
Edited by Harriet Monroe 

May 1922 



Along Old Trails 

by William H. Simpson 
Silver Fog, by Winifred Welles 
A Year, by Raymond Fischer 
Carlyle Mclntyre 

David Greenhood 



232 East Erie Street Chicago 

93.00 per Year Sintfle Numbers 25c 



[Jiqitized byVJVi 



 



How I wUi that some BngUah paper had anything Uke the authentic vitality of 
PoBTBTl Loait GMtnt 

Vol. XX No. II 

POETRY for MAY, 1922 

PAGE 

Along Old Trails William H. Simpson 59 

Los Llanos — ^Hopi Song of the Desert — Yucca is Yellowing — 
Bareback — Rain in the Hills — Navajo — ^Tewa Song — Desert 
Night — Mafiana — Burro Loads — Landscape — ^Trees — G)un- 
try Night — Inarticulate — So Little You Are I-II — De Noche — 
The Trail Up-sky — Campo Santo 

On the Road Carlyle Melntyre 70 

Promenading — ^The Scissor-grinder — ^The Visit 

Two Poems Joseph Auslander 72 

I Have Waited for You Long — Little Lou 
A Psalm for Cathleen Ni Hoolihan — ^Liberty . David Greenhood 74 
In Western Mountains I-III .... Glenn Ward Dresbach 76 

Question Flora Shujelt Rivola 77 

Rough Ways Kemper Hammond Broadus 78 

Burnt Out — Blizzard 

A Portrait Mildred Weston 79 

Creeds I-II — Immortality John H. Gavin 80 

Silver Fog Winifred Welles 83 

AYearl-IV Raymond T.Fischer 84 

Moving H.M. 88 

Reviews: 

A Woman with a Hammer Yvor Winters 93 


Quaker-gray and Rose Lola Ridge 99 

Vicarious Experience Muna Lee 102 

Jean Cocteau Rollo H. Myers 103 

Our Contemporaries: 

More New Magazines 109 

Correspondence: 

From the President of the P. S. A. . . Witter Bynner in 

A Word for Mr. Guest Gamaliel Bradford 1 14 

Notes and Books Received 115,116 

ManuscripCB must be accompanied by a stamped and self-addreMed envelope. 

Inclusive yearly subscription rates. In the United States, Meadoo, Cuba and 
American possessions, $3.00 net; in Canada, $3.15 net; in all other countries in the 
Postal Union, $3.25 net. Entered as seoond-dass matter Nov. 15, 1912, at the 
post-office, at Chicago, 111., under Act of March 3, 1879. 

Published monthly at 232 East Erie St., Chicago, 111. 

CopyHgfa 1922, by Harriet Monroe, AU rights reserved. 




@oedy 

A Magazine of \^e 



Vol. XX 
No. II 



MAY 1922 



ALONG OLD TRAILS 

LOS LLANOS 

A GAIN, O plains, 
^^ I go your windswept ways. 
With Indian, trapper, trader, pioneer — 
Gray shadows all 
On gray grass. 

I am companioned — 
Miracle most strange — 
By youth 
And its high dreams. 

West, with the sun, 
From rim to rim; 
And then, 
Beyond ken, 

Tired miles of trails 
On sod fresh trod. 

So new 

The billows of your grass — 

So new 

Your breezes, born each morn. 

But old — so old — 
The ghosts that pass. 

HOPI SONG OF THE DESERT 

You are so beautiful ! — 

Like the face of Ta-wa-wis-ni-mi. 

I cannot speak the words 

To tell of your too-much beauty — 

You, the desert; 

You, the going down of the sun; 

You, my beloved. 

If I could hold you. 
If I could touch you! — 
But you flee from me. 
As runs the deer. 

You are so beautiful ! 

If only my song 

Could tell of your beauty! 


 

I 

i 



Digit! 



zed by Google 



William H. Simpson 

YUCCA IS YELLOWING 



Yucca is yellowing — 

Hello, yellow! 

Cactus is crimsoning — 

Glow, glow, red fellow! 

And in the mesquite bush is seen 

A splash of green: 

As when sunset colors spill 

Their beauty down an evening hill. 

No one rides the trail today — 
Who cares if strange or lonely? 
No one goes the desert way — 
It is for beauty only. 



BAREBACK 

The winds ride bareback, 
Swinging lassos. 

Their reins hang loose. 
Their knees cling tight. 

The trees bend down . . . 
Behind, rides the rain. 

[6i] 




 

RAIN IN THE HILLS 

Were I the rain 
Coming over the hills — 

I should be glad 

That my cool fingers could ease the little fevers of dusty 

water-holes, 
And caress curled leaves of the cottonwoods. 

The herd. 

Pawing, bellowing, would let me quiet them. 

Standing in fresh pools by dusty water-holes — 

If I were the rain 
Coming over the hills. 

NAVAJO 

Your desert land is — 

An old squaw. 

Mumbling old words 

Beside dead embers of old thoughts. 

What she has told you 
Is not told to me. 
Though I ask. 



Your desert land is — 
Coyote, 




fFilliam H. Simpson 



Running alongside white horses 
As the wolves howl. 

What it has found out, running. 
Is not told to me, 
Though I ask. 



TEWA SONG 



Above the lands. 

Above the seas. 

You see, you know. 

All mysteries — 
Sun Old Man, 
Moon Old Man! 

Would I could fly 
On widespread wing 
Where whirlpools are 
And flame-tips sing — 
Sun Old Man, 
Moon Old Manl 

Die in the sea, 
And rise at mom; 
Thus would I go. 
And thus be born — 
Sun Old Man, 
Moon Old Man! 





DESERT NIGHT 



June moon of the desert, 

Sailing low — 
The ways are free 

Where God's fleets go. 

The palo verde 

You silver- tip; 
The mesquite leaves 

With your ghost-glow drip. 

Deep down in furrows 
Of wind-plowed hills 

You shine, and their glory 
Overspills. 



MAf^ANA 



Sf , sf, sefior, 

Should one ask, what for 

This slumbering 

When day is on the wing — 

There is roof overhead; 
On the table, bread; 
On the vine, 
Grapes for new wine; 
Burros two; 
And, querida miay you. 




fFilliam H. Simpson 



Tomorrow — 

Why trouble borrow? 

BURRO LOADS 

What do you carry, O burros gray, 
Heaped high with loads, at break of day? 

Pinyon for fires, when days are cold, 
And old men shiver, so cold, so old. 

Pinyon for fires, when coals are red. 
And brown-skinned bodies are blanketed. 

Pinyon for fires — like a crimson rose, 
Flaming, in camps by the early snows. 

Paisano, nifia, or sefior bold — 

Light for their souls, as bells are tolled. 

LANDSCAPE 

Quiet of November waters, 
White in the twilight— 

A narrow rippled ribbon, thrown carelessly by anybody, 
across faded fields. . . . 

Troubled March waters. 
Black in the noonshine — 

In curves, pushing against the late snows, tumbling them 
in. 

[6s] 




 

TREES 

You root deep, 
And reach skyward. 

Something you say to me 
That is under the earth. 
Something you say to me 
That is over the earth. 

What it is, 

Perhaps the closed eyes know. 

What it is. 

Maybe the folded wings know. 

COUNTRY NIGHT 

Night, you have soft fur. 

And it is black; 

I hear you purr, purr. 

Night, you fly to my door, 

A tired raven 

From the world quarters four. 

(Is your nest in the hedge 

By the road. 

Or on the moon's edge?) 

Night, you are a sleepy girl — 
Arms around my neck. 
Your dark hair in a whirl. 


fFilliam H. Simpson 

INARTICULATE 



O dumbness of tree 
And of sod — 

You can say so little to me, 
So much to God! 



so LITTLE YOU ARE 



Earth! 

So little you are 
In the whirl of all worlds, 
Through the long cold 
And the long night. 

1 marvel 

That the tips of the sun-flames 

Find you 

Across wide ways of the dark. 

Or is it 

That life 

May come from its hiding? 

II 

O loved one. 

So little you are 

In the swirl of all souls. 

Through the long days. 

Through the long years! 

I wonder 

That the flames of my longing 

Find you 

Across wide ways of desire. 

Or is it 

That life 

May come from its hiding? 

DE NOCHE 

O mother of all the dark! 
Draw near, on tiptoe, 
Blindfold me, and say: 
Go to sleep — to sleep — to sleep. 

If only the hills of the night would stay in their steadfast 

places — 
Bulging bulk of the hulk of the range. 
They creep, like a she-panther, to where I rest in the 

valley; 
They come, down-tumbling, to where I lie on the pine 

boughs. . . . 

The river runs away. 

The aspens, by the runaway river, are afraid. 

THE TRAIL UP-SKY 

Too soon 

Fades that last whiteness of the moon. 


William H. Simpson 

The face of noon is wrinkled, old — 
Like Pablo's, of the sheepfold, 
Who has seen all youth go by 
On the long trail, up-sky. 

Evening waits 

At her turquoise gates 

To fondle us, 

And sing and sing. 

With croon of mothering. 

We ask not whither, 

Ask not why. 

On the long trail up-sky. 

CAMPO SANTO 

In6s, Anita, Tom&s, Jos6, 

I sup with you, on my pilgrim way; 

Craving the stillness of 'dobe walls, 
And earth-floors trod by soft footfalls. 

Yon campo santo is earthen, too; 
Room in it for me, and room for you; 

Little earth homes, for the weary — all 
Who seek their sleep by the earthy wall. 

William H, Simpson 


POETRY: A Magazhne of Verse 
ON THE ROAD 

PROMENADING 

As I went down to Baldwin's Pond, 

The mud-hens dove from sight, 
And then like corks bobbed bravely up 

And paddled with delight. 

Oh, green-blade rushes fringed the pool. 

Eye-lashes delicate; 
The waters were as calm as though 

A seer should gaze on fate. 

And reed-birds, piping holy notes, 

Inspired me with such faith 
That I walked on the shining pond 

As though I were a wraith. 

Yes, hand in hand with whitest flowers. 

My heart beat mad and high — 
I went a-walking (it was spring) 

With lilies on the sky. 

THE SCISSOR-GRINDER 

The scissor-man. tramped into town. Ding-a-dong! 

ding-a-dong! 
He set his little grindstone down, and to its music hummed 

a song. 


Carlyle Mclntyre 

Old Grandma Dumpkins' scissor-shears, he edged their 

blades so finely 
That she cut off her children's ears and made them sing 

divinely. 

And Gaffer Smither*s pruning-hook he whetted to such 

keenness 
That Gaffer trimmed the town, and took the shade away 

for meanness. 

But furthermore, the butcher's knife he rounded off so 

dully. 
That cattle now enjoy their life and fill the milkpails fully. 

Then — ding-a-dong! ding-a-dong! I saw his red hat top 

the hill; 
But all night long I heard his song played by his brother 

watermill, 

THE VISIT 

My latch was lifted — a tall light crept in. 

His wings were bleeding and his feet were sore. 

His eyes were vacant as a wind-swept moor: 

Most pitiful of glorious cherubim. 

I fed him, as I thought an angel must 

Be weary from a way so long and hard; 

I bathed his feet and balmed his wings with nard. 

Then sat before him, nibbling my poor crust. 

"Oh, are you Death?" I asked him.— "I am Faith." 
"Then shall I be exalted?" "Nay, brought low." 
"What shall I have" — for he had risen to go — 
"To prove I have not succored a fell wraith?" 
"You shall have doubt and bitterness," he said. 
And hence it is that I am worse than dead. 

Carlyle Mclntyre 



TWO POEMS 

I HAVE WAITED FOR YOU LONG 

I have waited for you long: the sun withdraws 
To covert under the hills; I am alone; 
No bell disturbs the evening monotone; 
I seem to merge with those implacable laws 
Which left the pyramid a graven pause 
In some gigantic attitude of stone. 
There is an advent I have never known, 
There is an imminence that overawes. 

Approach me, making pallor with your feet: 

I have waited for you long, my cold white one; 

Let not another muffled night repeat 

The tragic gesture of oblivion. 

Let all death be concentred in your tread . . . 

You will not walk with me when I am dead. 


Joseph Auslander 



LITTLE LOU 



To drink where the birds drink — 

Oh, the draught's touch is tender and cool ! 

Think— 

Scattered like soft buds over the brink 

Of this delicate pool 

The birds leave their kisses for you, 

Little Lou. 

To dream where the birds dream — 

Oh, the wind on the leaves is drowsily wild! 

Stream, 

Feathers of slumber in magical number 

Over our child. . . . 

The birds breathe their pale dreams on you. 

Little Lou. 

To die where the birds die — 

Oh, why is the woodland so hushed everywhere! 

And why 

Are all the leaves listless and limp in mid-air 

Beneath a dead sky! . . . 

The birds, they are dying for you. 

Little Lou. 

Joseph Auslander 



A PSALM FOR CATHLEEN NI HOOLIHAN 

I — one of the grey sands, cousin to him that was crucified. 
Who am come from the breast of Sheba to Caesar's 

poisoned wine 
Of which no Israelite may die — 
Have not forgot the tang of grey sands 
Nor the tang of keen black grasses. 
I, who have danced in Rome, 
And known Roman women of the dances, 
I have not strayed from my tribe 
Nor am I lost to my sires. 
For today I came to an island 
Green as my mother's song of Canaan, 
Fragrant as rain on the flax by the Nile, 
And I heard Cathleen Ni Hoolihan crying. 

She silenced her grief, and when I heard her speak 

Her breath was a breeze from a hill of blue flowers; 

And though there was no crown upon her 

I knew she was a queen; 

And though she raised a queenly cheek and shoulder 

I knew she was a slave. 

Tell me who you are^ intruder on my sorrow! 

I am one of the grey sands y cousin to him that was crucified y 
Who am come from the breast of Shebay majestic for all time; 
Whose cheeks y like meat of thefigy were violet and white. 
Andy Cathleen Ni Hoolihany I heard your crying. 


David Greenhood 

She hid her white face in the sorrow of her hair. 
That fell to the white petals of her feet. 

LIBERTY 

Wantonly I've been a freed man! 
In a weary, checked freedom; 

Far from the spinning in the pure blue of air, 
Out of the hymnal curve of worlds. 

And I wish I were caught by an orbit in tune 
With the choral serfdom of stars. 

Here, beneath the tree-tops even, I find 

Among meadowing sheep random more sure than mine — 

More sure than the frolic of pennies 
And the eddy of men in the streets. 

Hear, O Democracy: 

Unless I be captive to rhythm 

I am least free; 

Unless the rose can hold me meek. 

Or tiredness of dusk put me to sleep. 

Unless I be creature of the morning. 

Sheep of a shepherd, 

I am gone far astray in liberty — 
Homesick beyond song. 

David Greenhood 
IN WESTERN MOUNTAINS 



He stood a moment at the weathered edge 

Of the highest cliff, and looked far out with me 

Upon great valleys ending in the haze, 

And mountains that from haze drove up a wedge 

Of snow in skies of lapis-lazuli. 

Then something of the littleness of days 

His life could span came to him dizzily; 

And he, who boasted of his strength with men, 

Turned back and grasped a little cedar tree 

Near by, for safety; and he shut his eyes, 

Shaken, and would not turn to look again. . . . 

Back from that cliff-edge, jutting to the skies, 

He crawled, and spoke at last with heavy breath: 

"God, what a place! What is it? Life or Death?" 

II 

Our words seemed much in vain. . . . 
How many Ages helped those heights attain 
Such silence in the sun, 
O silent One? . . . 



Ill 



Faint jingle of little bells 
And the half-heard shuffle of feet, 


Glenn Ward Dresbach 

High up on the mountain side. 

Crept down through the waves of heat; 
And a gray thread wove through the wide 
Cloth of the mountain side. 

The burro train came down 

With ores men take apart 
As the thing they love the best 

From the multitudinous heart 
Of the mountain. But all I could see 
Was a gray thread through tapestry. 

Glenn Ward Dresbach 



QUESTION 

When I make ready to go to sea 

The prairie ways keep calling me; 

And when from the deep I'd be sailing home 

I am beckoned seaward by the breaking foam. 

Why need my heart be divided so — 

Going when I stay, and staying when I go? 

Flora Shufelt Rivola 



iyj'i 




 
ROUGH WAYS 

BURNT OUT 

I Started laying sod along the roof 

While the smoke thickened. Blown from tree to tree. 
The fire came on. . . . At last I dropped the spade, 

And bitterly 

I watched the timbers smolder and catch fire; 

Heard the flame chuckling at the work I'd done — 
A pleasant mouthful! Even now I can't 

Quite see the fun. 

BUZZARD 

All day the wind has sent along the trail 

A cry of battle. Now night falls again. 
Swept through the dusk like horsemen spectral-pale. 

The charging snow-gusts spur across the plain. 

Beneath their onslaught fades each wagon-mark. 

The winding road is captured. Mad to slay, 
They thunder down upon me in the dark; 

They strike me, blind me — I have lost the way! 

Kemper Hammond Broadus 




A PORTRAIT 

His eyes can be quite old and stern. 
But I have often watched them yearn 
Over an animal in pain; 
And I have seen him through the rain 
Carry young Iambs into the fold. 
If a September night turns cold 
He leaves his sleep, and in the gloom 
Covers the bushes that might bloom. 
I know that when his eyes grow dim 
The first young bud will shout to him; 
For in the spring I see him kneel 
Upon the rigid earth, and feel 
With gentle hands among the leaves. 
No glistening rim of frost deceives 
His instinct for arbutus flowers. 
He sings, during his working hours. 
In a young voice a rousing song. 
And sweeps the lagging work along. 
To the delighted earth he brings 
Abounding love of living things. 
So when he climbs the slopes to meet 
The rising sun, they kiss his feet! 

Mildred Weston 


CREEDS 



Men build rough high walls 
Along straight narrow lines 
And call them — Creeds. 

Men carve distorted shapes 
Upon the rough high walls 
And call them — ^Truth. 

Men put fantastic rags 
On those distorted shapes 
And call them — Beauty. 

Men keep, forever, 

Within those rough high walls 

And call it— Right. 

Men manacle their minds. 

Fearful lest they scale the rough high walls 

And be free. 

Men blind their eyes, 

Fearful lest they see the mysterious world 

And be wise. 

Men deafen their ears, 

Fearful lest they hear 

Enthralling music calling them beyond 

And go. 


John H. Gavin 

Men creep onward 

Between those rough high walls, 

Those grotesque walls, those queer-decked walls. 

And call themselves saved. 

II 

I am not saved, 
But, friend, weep not my lot; 
For I was born of sun and earth. 
And the stars are relatives of mine. 

I am brother to the wind. 
And the sea is a sister of mine. 

I am kinsman to the wolf. 

And the lamb is a cousin of mine. 

The blood of the eagle is part of me. 

Part of me is blood of the dove. 

The blood of the lark flows through my veins, 

And the venomous blood of the snake. 

My mother nestles the pine. 
The columbine, aster and rose. 

My mother fosters the oak. 
And the violet suckles her. 

My mother gives life to the palm. 
And the poppy grows red at her breast. 

[8i] 




 

Yes, and nothing trammels me — 
Save men, my most beloved fools! 

Men would deafen my ears, blinder my eyes, 
Manacle my mind! 

Ah, my kindred, I'll have no walls around me!- 
No rough high walls, no queer-decked walls. 

IMMORTALITY 

I am immortal as a burst of song. 
That quivers from the thrush's throat 
And sinks to silence. 

I am immortal as the kiss of love. 
That wakes the world to melody. 
And leaves a memory. 

I am immortal as the laughing hour. 

That throws her leaven on the sodden heart — 

And trips away. 

I am immortal as the purple dusk. 
That drugs the weary brain to dreams. 
And fades. 

I am immortal as the wind of March, 
That woos the barren earth to life — 
And passes. 


John H. Gavin 

I am immortal as the stubborn hills. 
That breast the storms of centuries. 
And wear to sand. 

I am immortal as the living sun. 
That flames a moment in eternity. 
And sputters out. 

John H. Gavin 



SILVER POG 

Hush — hush — hush! Steady as footsteps in the sand, 

I hear two other oars crunch in their locks — 

And look now, how my boat rocks 

To feel another boat dose by — 

So close, so close, that if I reach my hand . . . 

Who are you, who am I, 

To halt each other with a cry? 

Let us continue blurred and lonely. 
Touched by each other's trembling only. 
It is so seldom two can be 
Each for each a mystery. 

tFinifred JFelles 
A YEAR 



Before the snow had melted from north slopes 
John Mortimer could feel the coming spring. 
The imp that stirs the sleeping roots of trees, 
And sends the sap up to the highest twigs. 
Was in his blood. He envied the gaudy rooster 
Who from his throne upon the leaning gate 
Shouted his challenge through the morning air 
Across the sleeping fields where snowdrifts lay. 

One morning, going townward with the milk. 

He offered Mary Allindale a ride. 

Her father was a queer old man who worked 

A little farm, and sometimes played his fiddle 

Half the night after his work was done. 

She taught the village school. John never knew 

How pretty Mary was until that day. 

Dusky horizons, deep blue skies where clouds 

Float slowly, in the distance three black specks — 

They must be horses and a man plodding 

Along the boundary line between the gray 

Of last year's life and the black earth new-plowed. 

Resting upon a bed of last year's leaves. 

At noon John Mortimer could see tall ranks 


Raymond P. Fischer 

Of ripening corn; he dreamed of growing stock 
And bigger barns, and Mary Allindale. 

The evening wind blew sweet across the fields 

Of clover when at last he went to her. 

It brought them tell-tale odors of the farms 

They passed, the faint warm smell of growing corn, 

The cool and heavy incense of the stream 

That wanders half asleep through Watson's pasture. 

A whip-poor-will was crying in the birches 

By the bridge; the stars were tiny points 

Of gold above, and the road was dim and gray. 

John Mortimer said little, for it seemed 

That Mary Allindale belonged to him 

That night; the stars and mist-hung road were his, 

And awkwardly he took her in his arms. 

All the way home he heard her stifled laughter: 

He called himself a fool and vowed that he 

Would think no more of Mary Allindale. 



II 

The mower sang from dawn until the sun 
Was overhead; from noon hour until night. 
When hay was in he started on his barn. 
He liked the sound of hammers at the work. 
And liked to see the visioned barn take form. 

August came, and turned green fields to gold. 

Now binders moved across the sunny fields; 

Men followed them and left the grain in shocks. 

The threshers crawled along the country roads — 

Great Chinese dragons. Men brought them loads of grain 

To be devoured in a cloud of dust. 

When the barn was done his neighbors came in crowds, 
But Mary did not come. Shrill fiddles scraped. 
Feet stamped and shuffled; but he stood outside. 
So she preferred to him a good-for-nothing 
Fiddling fool who scarcely owned the clothes 
Upon his back. "They've gone out west to make 
A fortune; then they'll study music." The moon 
Came from behind a cloud and grinned at him. 
A screech-owl laughed from somewhere in the dark. 

Ill 

A steady thud and clump of horses* feet; 

A single crow seemed frozen in the sky — 

Borne on the cruel wind it drifted by. 

John Mortimer plowed on from dark to dark; 

He cut his fields in furrows for the frost 

And snow to smooth. But earth had lost its goodness — 

He did not care whether it shone or rained. 

The days when sun poured down like golden wine 

Did not deceive — ^he knew the world was wrong. 


Raymond P. Fischer 



IV 



The tiniest stream is hushed when winter comes. 
It cannot whisper to the passing banks 
About the great green ocean and its ships. 
The days when it has run before the wind 
Laughing and beckoning with hands of foam, 
The nights when tired of play it has crept up 
Some distant bay and murmured round the piling 
Of silent rocks, are all forgotten now. 

And winter hushed the whispering memories. 
He swung his ax all day and had no thoughts 
Except the quiet things about his work 
That come unsought to every worker's mind. 

One morning, going townward with the milk, 
He stopped to give the new schoolma'am a lift. 
Though he had often passed her on the road 
He had never known how beautiful she was. 
Though snow still lay in drifts on northern slopes. 
Though trees and roadside brush were white with frost, 
John Mortimer could feel the coming spring. 

Raymond P. Fischer 


COMMENT 



MOVING 



POETS and prosers have discussed in many volumes 
man's relation to his environment, but how much we 
are what surrounds us is still an open question. 

For nearly ten years Poetry has been at home in the 
not-over-spacious room to the left of the entrance of 
543 Cass Street. By the time this number is issued we 
shall have torn ourselves away from this cubic box of 
memories; we shall have shifted our furniture and files, 
our books and back numbers, our gallery of poets' photo- 
graphs and other pictures, our tempers and temperaments, 
our hearts and hopes and hospitalities, to a strange place 
as yet unenriched by history, leaving this atmospheric 
chamber, doubled in the big Victorian mirror over the 
mantel-piece, to the coldly calculating advances of the 
medical department of an insurance company. 

But we cannot depart without saying goodbye, without 
consecrating our farewell by recalling the things which 
have happened, the people who have entered or lingered, 
in this old haunted and haunting room. Once it was part 
of a dwelling which, erected soon after the Great Fire of 
Seventy-one, housed the family and the books of Ezra 
McCagg, owner of the largest private library in Chicago. 
For two or three decades the house stood among congenial 
neighbors — abodes of the quality, set in spacious grounds. 
But the quality, including the McCaggs, scattered, and 


Moving 

business penetrated — at first on tip-toe, hesitatingly. 
The American Bankers' Insurance Company bought the 
place and connected it in the rear with a new building, 
the two right-angling an apartment-house on the corner. 
And while their alterations were still fresh, in the summer 
of 191 2, the inexperienced prospective editor of a poets' 
magazine-to-be, entered the Ohio Street door one morning 
in search of a North Side ofBce in the neighborhood. 

Whom should she find in possession, as president of the 
insurance company, but one of the magazine's guarantors 
— Mr. James P. Whedon of happy memory, one of the 
most generous of all because his fortune was always 
moderate. Soon the editor and her first associate, Alice 
Corbin Henderson, were hospitably installed in one of the 
two rentable rooms beside the Cass Street entrance, their 
good friend adding office-desks and chairs to their meagre 
business equipment. From this room, during that 
summer of 191 2, the first letters and circulars went out in 
search of contributors and subscribers, and hither came 
those first responses on which depended the vitality of 
the magazine. 

Ezra Pound's first letter, for example — I have often 
recorded the cordiality of his co-operation as Poetry's 
first representative abroad. Along with him came through 
the mail the other first imagists — H. D. and Aldington, W. 
C. Williams and Flint and Cannfll. John G. Neihardt 
greeted us with a tragedy; Joseph Campbell with The 
Piper; Allen Upward with his Scented Leaves from a 

Chinese Jar; Joyce Kilmer — ^long before the brutal War 
which killed him — with Trees; John Reed — heroic beloved 
vagabond — with Sangar; Mrs. Conkling with her musical- 
minded Symphony in a Mexican Garden^ which, arriving 
in the nick of time for our first number, aided us in ante- 
dating a proposed Boston contemporary who had threat- 
ened to requisition our title. And so on — those important 
early contributors who enriched the magazine with their 
own values. 

The excitement of the adventure is what I remember 
best from that first experimental year. The novel enter- 
prise hovered, in the mind of the public, on the delicate 
border-line between the sublime and the ridiculous; and 
our own minds trembled between a thrill and a laugh. If 
pride was inflated by authoritative words from poets and 
critics, it soon collapsed under expert stabs of wrath or 
ridicule. If a few new and unknown poets aroused our 
hopes of genius, hundreds astounded us with self-satisfied 
mediocrity or worse. We were dashed between extremes, 
like a rubber ball in the play of a juggler; and the thing 
least expected was what happened next. 

Who led the long procession of distinguished visitors 
whose faces and words now haunt these walls? I think 
Rabindranath Tagore was the first of the then-unknown- 
but-now-famous bards who have actually darkened the 
Cass Street door and sat in our "poets' chair." Tagore, 
the sage of Bengal, whom we had thought of as in England 
or maybe India, but who wrote to us from Urbana, 


Moving 

Illinois, upon his first appearance in English in Poetry's 
third number — December, 191 2. And the second was 
Lindsay, who followed his General Booth to Cass Street 
that first winter, sealing his hardship with the hand of 
friendship. Witter Bynner and Arthur Ficke, the Damon 
and Pythias of the art, were among the early arrivals; 
and Agnes Lee Freer, a newly married resident of Chicago; 
and Helen Hoyt, who soon graduated from her com- 
mercial post into Poetry's office; and Maxwell Boden- 
heim, then mute and inglorious. 

And so on. The magic transformation of abstract 
name-carrying entities into living, breathing men and 
women, was then, as it continues to be, the editor's high 
reward. Poets, it became evident, were not mere voices 
far away, but human beings who could come into Cass 
Street and even develop into friends. During our second 
twelvemonth there were important miracles in this kind. 
Amy Lowell, pilgrimaging from Boston to Chicago with 
poems under her arm, seemed a prophet of change — was 
East coming West at last? was an era passing, and a 
new one on the way? As if to give answer, here came 
Carl Sandburg walking solidly into the office when the 
fateful year 1914 was new or perhaps unborn; entering 
with his strong hand out and his slow rich loyal voice 
uttering words of greeting. 

In the spring arrived two British poets from opposite 
curves of the world. The illustrious William Butler 
Yeats changed from a Poet Enshrined into a living 

Irishman who could give tit for tat to George Moore's 
imaginative gossip about him which had just appeared. 
In his honor Poetry "eased out" of Cass Street long 
enough to give a banquet which has since been recognized 
as a milestone in the path of the "new movement.'^ And 
along in April or May, one afternoon when the editor was 
alone, entered, on his way home from the South Seas, a 
handsome young Englishman then still obscure — one 
Rupert Brooke, a member of the "Georgian" group 
whose first anthology had but recently appeared. How 
peaceful was the day — how remote the possibility of war — 
to this blond young poet whose spirit was to "straighten 
like a flame" at the then-so-imminent bugle call, and run 
into the war-god's deadly arms with a song! 

Sara Teasdale, John Gould Fletcher, Edgar Lee 
Masters — these and many others, from Missouri, Arkan- 
sas, Chicago, the Seven Seas, were Cass Street guests of 
those early years. Later came Robert Frost and Wallace 
Stevens — opposite poles of the renaissance. The proces- 
sion goes on still — may it find its way into Erie Street — 
the procession of shadow-shapes assuming flesh and blood. 

Nor should we forget the others — the countless visitors 
who have arrived at our doors but never in our covers. 
They come with verses, mostly by mail but often in person; 
some modestly, some over-sure. They ask for criticism 
which, if granted, rarely satisfies the urge or ache within. 
They can not be classified — they are as varied as other 
growths of the living earth. Rich and poor, bourgeois 


Moving 

and bolshevik, refined and coarse, tragic and absurd — they 
have played their different parts in Cass Street, strangely 
unlike but moved always by the same motive: the longing 
to express themselves, to reveal their naked souls. 

If these walls could speak — these walls that we are 
leaving! They have heard everything discussed and torn 
to bits — men, women, poems, theories, tendencies, the 
war, the peace, marriage, divorce, clothes, coiffures, eye- 
brows, the abstract beauty and the ultimate defeat, life, 
death and immortality, the weather and the curve bf a 
dog's tail. And they have listened through hours of 
silence, with nothing ringing but the telephone, while the 
editor wrote, in old-fashioned long-hand, countless 
breathlessly-brief notes to poets; or summoned spirits 
from the vasty deep to infuse wit and wisdom into her 
editorials, and help her come to the end with a flourish — 
as now, when she must test Poetry's personality by 
shifting its environment, as she signs a final farewell to 
old Five-forty-three. H. M. 

REVIEWS 

A WOMAN WITH A HAMMER 

The Contemplative ^arry and The Man with a Hammer^ 
by Anna Wickham. Introduction by Louis Untermeyer. 
Hftcourt, Brace & Co. 

"The most casual reading — if such a thing were pos- 
sible — of Mrs. Wickham's work reveals the strength of 

her candor, the intense singleness of her purpose," writes 
Mr. Untermeyer in an introduction that makes one admire 
the shrewdness of the gentlemen who chose him for his 
task. And without wishing to disagree, the hesitant 
reader may be permitted to wonder what candor and a 
purpose may have to do with an art. In the present 
case, they seem to resolve themselves into pugnaciously 
put platitudes, like the following: 

Am I your mate because I share your bed? 

Go thenl Find each day a new mate outside your house. 

I am your mate if I can share your vision. 

Nor is one entirely ready to question the possible 
necessity of this explanation to the person addressed. It 
is simply that one, as a male in general, has a right to 
a sort of hypothetical intelligence; for a poet is, presum- 
ably, addressing the more illuminated of mankind. 

Nor, again, should a reviewer allow himself to be too 
greatly piqued by a technical insult to his sex; and the 
present reviewer does not purpose to be so. But even 
perspicuous generalities do not constitute poetry, and 
platitudes are not perspicuous; and a perusal of this sort 
of poetry in quantities enforces boredom. This poet, 
like too many others, becomes more interested in the 
reason for her unhappiness than in the unhappiness 
itself; and, having reasons that are commonplace enough, 
there is no subtle evasion in her statement, nothing to 
disguise, however thinly, the barrenness of trodden 
ground. 


A Woman with a Hammer 

When she essays a more lyric mode, she is equally 

stale, and her staleness is even more obvious to the 

average eye: 

With other thrift I turn the key 
Of the old chest of Memory, 
And in my spacious dreams unfold 
A flimsy stuff of green and gold, 
And walk and wander in the dress 
Of old delights and tenderness. 

In The Cherry Blossom Wand she achieves something 

of a literary grace, perhaps slightly more than that; and 

in Sehnsucht an epigram that is really very hard and well 

done; but otherwise there is little in the book to commend. 

I quote Sehnsucht: 

Because of body's hunger are we born. 
And by contriving hunger are we fed; 
Because of hunger is our work well done, 
And so are songs well sung, and things well said. 
Desire and longing are the whips of God — 
God save us all from death when we are fed. 

Mrs. Wickham's handling of sex-problems is too 
obvious, coming after Lawrence, for serious consideration; 
indeed, her handling of all topics, coming after someone 
or something else, is so. Nothing is so awkward to the 
mind of him addressed as a belated irony. 

"She is, in quick succession, burning hot and icy cold; she 
is driven from fiery antagonisms to smoldering apathy; 
she is acutely sensitive, restless, harassed," writes our 
commentator, approaching his climax; and most of us 
will leave him with the field. Yvor Winters 

WOODWINDS 

We^ the Musk Chasers^ by Loureine Aber. Ralph Fletcher 

Seymour. 

The most significant men of this poetic era have sur- 
rounded themselves, like the princess who slept for a 
hundred years, with brambles of objectivity, striving to 
insure inviolableness, man being resentful of intrusion. 
All the while the women have given themselves from day 
to day without reserve. There are rare exceptions, of 
course. But in the main it is the man who is on his 
guard, and the woman generous, in poetry and in life. 
So Loureine Aber has written without subterfuge; as 
though, like Marie BashkirtsefF, for her own journal. 
She speaks not alone of and for herself, but puts in order 
the chaotic protest and exaltation of numberless in- 
articulate girl-voices. There are in this age so many 
printed, and in a measure "successful" poets, that one 
forgets how many times that number of sensitive spirits 
are more silent than the dumb. For them it is not so 
simple a matter to net the flickering moth of emotion and 
mood and preserve it in adequate expression. Quite 
often the deterrent is laziness and a Nietzschean desire to 
exhale a god and a universe in one breath. Poetry, says 
the aspirant, with eyes "in a fine frenzy rolling," is a 
matter of inspiration and she grasps feverishly at vers libre^ 
perverting it into undigested prose divided arbitrarily 
into lines, unmindful of the euphonic devices by which it 
can be given beauty and charm. Loureine Aber has done 


Woodwinds 

her service not for these, but for the thousands of girls in 
cities, either born speechless or submerged in a bedlam of 
typewriters, adding machines, and switchboards. 

Miss Aber makes use not of a niggling rhythm of 
syllable for syllable, or a subtle rhythm of vowel, but of a 
large rhythm of word and phrase, so large in swing as to 
be almost Sandburgian. In it there is more than a trace 
of the influence of popular syncopation — 

Go so far, and halt your tracks. 

Catch the first glimpse, turn your backs. . . . 

Her work is done with commendable neatness and 
frugality. I have mentioned Sandburg in connection with 
rhythm; the resemblance goes deeper than that. But 
Loureine Aber has lopped off all extraneous material and 
presented herself in the kernel. Here are no polemics or 
propaganda. One is often tempted to do with poetry as 
a friend of mine does with the drama when she divides it 
into problem plays and good plays; or, to say with Yeats 
and emph^ize well the last word: "One makes of one's 
struggle with oneself poetry ; of one's struggle with others, 
rhetoric^ The self is not in the poet, as in elementary 
forms, a simple whole like the cipher. Rather in the 
higher organism it is a grouping of rebellious and often 
anarchistic parts; and in every such being the struggle is 
both common and unique. Moreover, this is an age of 
acute self-consciousness, as witness not only its verse but 
its novel, such as it is — the more diffuse form, therefore the 
fuller evidence. In order to be authentic one must have 


the keen observation and the frank speech of a surgeon. 

One has, however, the option of distilling one's speech into 

the essence of itself. This Miss Aber does not do. She 

is very simple, but gives glimpses, as in Old Man^ of an 

elemental strength that may be developed far: 

Dawn sprang wildly to her lips, 

And the little hard breasts burst as a waterfall over the rocks. 

I, the dark pine at the precipice neck, 

Lunged and was still; 

Then swiftly, as wild birds go to the kill. 

Toppled, and ran with her youth to the sea. 

They said I was wanton and cruel 

To have taken her youth at the height. 

To have matched the great might 

Of my years 

With her slender beauty and tremulous fears . . . 

I tell you, I lunged and was still, 
Then swiftly, as wild birds go to the kill, 
Toppled, and ran with her youth to the sea . . . 
Pity mel 

Though one may disagree with the poet on "beautiful 

hills" as a necessary adjunct to the concept of God, God 

in the City is as strong an indictment against those who 

"wrought pigsties out of gauze" as though it were legally 

drawn up, witnessed, signed, and sealed. It is a universal 

confession: 

Beautiful hills. 

Valleys ... 

And all the other things we think of when we think of God, 

Are not here. 

I find myself at a loss to formulate much good, 

And so I simply say "God!'* 


Woodwinds 

Asyoucair'Fido!" 
And let it go at that. 

If Miss Aber has not yet reached her poetic majority, 
she is at any rate among the few one would have bring 
their gifts to perfect fruition through a study of the 
masters, new and old, and through the sacrifice of ease. 

I should like also to add an appreciative word to Mr. 
Seymour for the format of this book, and to Mr. Blackwell 
for his delicate decorations. Pearl Andehon 

QUAKER-GRAY AND ROSE 

Willow Pollen^ by Jeannette Marks. Four Seas Co. 

In this first book of verse, with its non-committal cover 
of quaker-gray, I like best the poems in which Miss 
Marks' clear, sharp and often whimsical mind is in the 
ascendency over her emotions. 

In some spirits pain is a flame that flares and consumes 
till the burning consciousness lights up all around it; in 
others, a smouldering ache that, however it be heaped 
with green withes, throws up a screening smoke. In the 
groping cries of some of thpse songs of pain I feel a lonely 
and proud spirit that has been hurt much, but the hurt 
has blurred instead of sharpening expression. 

The cleavage between Miss Marks' mental and emo- 
tional approach gives a curious effect of duality of per- 
sonality. Sometimes it seems as though the verses must 
have been written by two esthetically dissimilar person- 
alities. On one page you will find the innocent sentimen- 

tality of a piece of album verse, and on the other such 
acidly lovely lines as these from White Hair: 

All the warmth has gone out of white hair; 
It only answers to the wind, 
And lifts and stirs like creeping snow 
Close to the frozen scalp of earth. 

This disparity can no doubt be partly explained by the 
inclusion of early poems, but it is surprising to find such 
pallid stuff as Your Sunlit Way between the same covers 
as a sharply-faceted poem like Stars^ with its molded form 
and finely pointed thought. 

Often you feel how this southern woman loves the sun. 
In Calendar^ where the tender, intimately whimsical 
gossip about nature recalls Emily Dickinson, the sun is 
likened to "a bee, a big bee, a burning bee." 

Throughout the book are scattered delightful whimsi- 
calities, and stanzas from which luminous images leap 
like sudden lights out of a mist. Sometimes with an 
unexpected line Miss Marks can push out the walls of a 
narrow room into an unlimited horizon. Take the rose- 
gray magic of this conjured picture: 

Sea gulls I saw lifting the dawn with rosy feet. 

In Jeannette Marks' more intense moods — Sea GullSy 
from which the above lines are taken, Dragon and others 
— there is a note of hysteria, a desperate, half-fascinated 
peering into the depths where 

myriad eyes 
. . . float and sway, stab, sting and die away. 

[lOO] 



 



Quaker-gray and Rose 

You feel the terror and curiosity of a romantic imagi- 
nation that is drawn by the sinister-grotesque into the 
darker ways of fantasy. But always in this nature the 
romanticist is in eternal conflict with the moralist — no 
mind-made moralist at that, but one into whose quivering 
soul is bitten, as with an acid, a sense of inescapable 
responsibility for others' woes. 

For me the charm of fVillow Pollen lies in those verses 
where the poet's heart is quiescent, and the alert and 
supple mind is free to play delicately, as in Cloud: 

Tut, it is a ship as plain as anything. 

Full-spread to find the silver edges of the world 

Where ships and island daffodils 

Bum, follow sun, dip, 

Cling to the shining brim like flapping butterflies . . . 

And the "sky" . . . 

Now you tell what the sky is! 

In the last two lines you touch a certain elfin quality 
in Miss Marks' mind, a quality that is emphasized in the 
delicious sleep song. Rose Toada: 

Shoo, Rose Toada, Shoo! 
Jewelled red eyes for you. 
Shoo, Rose Toada, Shoo! 

Hoosh, Rose Toada, hoosh! 
Litde green snake in the bush. 
Hoosh, Rose Toada, hoosh! 

Bizz, Rose Toada, buzz! 
Gold on its wings and fuzz. 
Bizz, Rose Toada, -buzz! 



Lola Ridge 



[lOl] 




 

VICARIOUS EXPERIENCE 

Clouds and CobblestoneSy by Hortense Flexner. Houghton 

Mifflin Co. 

Though Miss Flexner's poetry builds up the picture of 
an attractive and cultivated personality, and though her 
verse is always polished and sometimes sparkling, it is 
never heart- wringing. It has not, one imagines, wrung 
the heart of the poet. We find her deeply moved by a 
number of things — a newspaper account of a pogrom, a 
child's death in a charity ward, the futility of war. Her 
sympathetic scope is wide: she sees, with a pitiful vision 
devoid of mockery, the tragedy of approaching age in 
the life of a rich and shallow woman; she has a wistful 
comprehension of a child's day-dreams. But all this is, 
after all, vicarious experience. One misses the swirl and 
rush of unimpeded personal emotion. 

We find also a generous sprinkling of "poetic" themes 
and words — Helen and asphodel — with an occasional 
charming vers de societi^ of which we may instance For an 
Old Lady to whom Sonnets had been Written; and less often, 
such a skilfully wrought interpretation as The Death 
Mask of an Unknown Soldier, For the rest, we learn that 
the poet loves April blossoms, the colors green and gray, 
the little child next-door — facts agreeably but not mem- 
orably recorded. Some of the love-lyrics have fragrance 
and charm, but none of them seems deeply motivated. 
There is hardly a poem in the book that seems to have 
sprung into being because of an irresistible inner urge, 


Vicarious Experience 

Too frequently these poems are weighted down, ver- 
bose: Miss Flexner uses words unsparingly, a defect not 
excused even by the intrinsic and evocative beauty of 
many of her favorite words. This criticism does not hold 
true of her free verse, however — clever, frequently 
humorous flashes from an active mind, which serve to 
counterbalance the easy sentimentality of the lyrics. 

As a proof that the volume contains much that is lovely, 
it is only fair to let the poet speak for herself, as she does 
very characteristically in Four Things: 

Four things I cannot remember 

In the fulness of their grace, 

Wind of the spring, curve of the sea. 

The moon's pale touch on a white birch-tree. 

And your kiss upon my face. 

For though I cherish and hold them. 
The heavy winter through, 
Spring is more gay, the sea foam-wrought 
And the birch, are lovelier than I thought; 
And a kiss is always new. 

Muna Lee 

JEAN COCTEAU 

Poesies — igiy'ig20y and Carte BlanchCy by Jean Cocteau. 

Editions de la Sir^ne, Paris. 

M. Cocteau has been described as the "enfant prodige" 
of contemporary French literature. As to whether this 
description conveys the whole truth about him or only 
a part, opinions will necessarily differ. His latest book 
of poems reveals both his weaknesses and his strength. 

Whatever else may be said about them, the fact remains 
that here is the expression of a very definite personality 
reacting to an extraordinary degree to visual and tangible 
stimuli, and endowed with both imagination and fantasy. 

Indeed, so vivid are the impressions this poet receives, 
and so contemptuous is he of the ordinary rules govern- 
ing the use of language, that in the attempt to fuse the 
one with the other the result is frequently baffling, even 
to the most intelligent reader, and must be often com- 
pletely incomprehensible to the majority. This must be 
counted a fault, if clarity and universal intelligibility 
are reckoned as characteristics of the greatest art — and 
most people take this view. Similarly, contempt or 
neglect of form can be pushed to extreme limits^ and this 
is a reproach to which M. Cocteau evidently lays himself 
open. But once these points have been conceded to 
the — not necessarily carping — critic, it must be admitted 
that the poems themselves merit serious attention, even 
if they fail to arouse universal admiration. 

We are conscious that the poet is, as it were, walking 
on a tight-rope all the time; or at least on some level to 
which the ordinary reader is, to say the least, unac- 
customed. To vary the metaphor, we might compare 
him to an excessively agile mountain goat who will soon 
be lost sight of by his pursuer unless the latter in his 
turn manages to reproduce, with tolerable exactitude, 
each perilous leap from peak to peak so earelessly under- 
taken by the quarry he pursues. Indeed, unless the 


Jean Cocteau 

reader possesses the power not only of making mental 
leaps, but of making the same mental leaps as the author 
of these PoisieSy fee will often find himself hopelessly 
left behind and floundering in valleys of apparent non- 
sense. 

This poetry is elusive in the extreme, obeying, it might 
almost be said, no rules but those of the author's imagi- 
native caprices. M. Cocteau reminds one at times of 
Humpty Dumpty in his treatment of words. "When 
I use a word," Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful 
tone, "it means just what I choose it to mean — neither 
more nor less." "The question is," said Alice, "whether 
you can make words mean diflferent things." "The 
question is," saidHumpty Dumpty," which is to be master 
—that's all." 

But none of this is said in condemnation. Certain 
means are proper to certain ends, and the ultimate test 
of a poem, as of anything else, is whether it achieves the 
effect intended. And it must at once be conceded that 
M. Cocteau 's poems do this in nine cases out of ten. 
Take, for example, Ascenseur (of course unpunctuated) : 

Tant de douceur 
dans notre moelle 
c'est un masseur 
graiss6 d'6toiles 
Gabriel artificiel 
en tombant du ciel 
freine un peu 

On m'a parl6 d'un ascenseur extraordinaire i New York 

il donne le baiser du vacuum cleaner 

et on vous retire en bas comme une loque 

Petite cabine vernie 
abominable douceur 

.La mort fauche avec son aile 
tous les Melons de T^chelle 

une 6bauche 
d'agonie 

Le m&t de hune 
huil6 de lune 

on touche le bouton i gauche 
4 Tangle de la vitrine 

La lune douche Testomac 
ouvre la bouche 

ut de poitrine 

Here we have, in a few lines, all the physical and psy- 
chological sensations connected with our experiences 
of lifts; and the whole poem is on a definitely imaginative 
level. 

Le Voyage en Italie is another good example of M. 
Cocteau's style, and while it is far too long for quotation, 
it is rich in happy phraseology and striking images, such 
as: 

Rome Le pape a enferm8 tout le monde dehors 

Shelley a toujours eu Tair 
d'une grande fille noy^e 

Naples A Paris ce soir 

il fait un temps de concierges dehors 

[io6] 



 



Jean Cocteau 

While the nostalgia of this most Parisian of Parisians 

amongst the monuments of Rome and the ^^ plafonds 

lourds'' is eloquently voiced in the following poignant 

lines: 

J'ai besoin de Paris et des Champs Elys6es 

j*ai besoin de Paris je ne suis pas de Rome 

je ne suis pas de Moscou Marie 

rue d'Anjou douceur ang^vine 

pauvre Marie j'ai mal i mes Champs £lys6es. 

In Batterie the poet reveals another side of himself — 
his love of the sun and of the contrast between the black 
skins of negroes and the azure skies under which they 
live and toil. This note is of frequent occurrence, but 
nowhere is it more eloquently expressed than in this 
hymn to the sun, which is one of the most formal of the 
poems in this volume: 

Soleil je t'adore comme les sauvages 
k plat ventre sur le rivage 

Soleil tu vernis tes chromos 
tes paniers de fruit, tes animaux 

Fais-moi le corps tann6, sal6 
fais mon grand douleur s'en aller 



Fais braire la cigale en haut du pin 
fais-moi sentir le four i pain. 



Fais-moi r6pandre mes mauvais r^ves 
soleil, boa d'Adam et d'Eve! 

Fais-moi un peu m'habituer 

i ce que mon pauvre Jean soit tu6. 


POETRY: A. Magazine of Verse 

The poem is too long to quote in its entirety, but it is 
one of the most striking in the collection — a collection 
redolent of the exoticism of ships and ports, American 
bars and sky-scrapers, negroes, films, ice-cream sodas 
and the melancholy of swings and roundabouts — the 
whole seen through the eyes and filtered through the 
sensibility of a highly cultured, versatile, imaginative, 
curious and extremely modern mind. 

Carte Blanche is a reprint of a series of articles which 
appeared in Paris Midi during the summer of 191 9. 
They treat of a variety of subjects, ranging from a dis- 
cussion of the latest movements in French music and 
painting to essays in sheer reporting, such as the descrip- 
tion of the Difili de la Victoire^ at the peace celebrations 
on July fourteenth, 191 9. They furnish another example 
of the versatility of M. Cocteau and of the never-failing 
lightness of his touch and the quickness of his compre- 
hension. The paper devoted to Landru is full of good 
things, and a model of this kind of topical essay. 

Landru inaugure le retour da Fait-Divers civil. Avec lui le chien 
6cras6 retrouve ses droits. . . . L'amoureux mediocre brflle des sou- 
venirs. . . . n'est-il pas plus simple de bri^ler toute la dameP ... Si 
Landru se livrait i cette liquidation, j'aime Timaginer au coin du feu, 
dsonnant les cendres de sa belle d'un air rdveur et soupirant: "Du 
courage — il ne faut plus penser i tout cela." 

Perhaps some readers will prefer M. Cocteau's prose 
to his verse: enough has perhaps been quoted to reveal 
the quality of both. Rollo H. Myers 


OUR CONTEMPORARIES 

MORE NEW MAGAZINES 

If new magazines may be assumed to indicate a certain 
vitality in the art they represent, modern poetry may be 
congratulated; for its voices are speaking everywhere, in 
organs from leaflet to folio size. Some of these organs 
are for poets only, but most of them admit him with 
writers of tales, critics, sometimes limners and composers. 

Here is The Beacon^ published in Oxford, England, by 
B. H. Blackwell, who has given so many young English 
poets their first appearance in small volumes beautifully 
made. The Beacon "aims to deal broadly and construc- 
tively with three essential and inseparable things — Educa- 
tion, Religion and Art." The first number, introduced by 
a poem by Tagore, and A Credo for a New Era by Stephen 
Graham, contains interesting articles and drawings, but 
little in our special province. 

Broom, our international Roman contemporary which 
is now in its fifth number, has lost Alfred Kreymborg 
from its staff. Harold A. Loeb now conducts it in Rome, 
and Lola Ridge has recently become its American editor, 
her office being at 3 East Ninth Street, New York. 

Another international monthly began in Barcelona, 
Spain, last February. Prisma proclaims itself ''una 
revista intemacional de poesia,* and enriches its first 
number with Opflfer's portrait of Carl Sandburg, an article 
on the latter by Louis Butcher Lee, and translations of 

nine of his shorter poems, including Jan Kubelik and 
Cool Tombs. Indeed, Spain has been sending us a number 
of magazines of late. Two from Madrid are La Plumay 
now in its third year, and the first three numbers of 
Indice (Revista Mensual). 

And another impending international is Secession^ 
which, "instigated at Paris, opens fire this spring at 
Vienna, will march on Berlin, and eventually establish 
itself in New York. ... It will, in its early numbers, 
expose the private correspondence, hidden sins, and 
secret history of its American contemporaries — The Dial^ 
Little RevieWy Broomy Poetry, etc." 

From the far antipodes comes The Australian Poetry 
Annual of ig22y published by the Melbourne Literary 
Club, and presenting poems sometimes creditable, but 
not yet exciting or suggestive of the locale. 

Youthy the Chicago monthly which we welcomed last 
autumn, must have been beloved of the gods, as it died 
with a promptness befitting its title. To The fFavey also 
published by Steen Hinrichson, we may wish a longer 
and more prosperous life. Its editor is Vincent Starrett, 
and it contains poems and prose by a number of our 
friends; also, in the second number, a group of beautiful 
wood-cuts by Birger Sandzen. 

The RevieweTy of Richmond, Virginia, now in its second 
volume, is discovering some interesting material in the 
South. We quoted last month one of Mrs. Peterkin's bits 
of Negro folk-lore. 

[no] 



 



^ ^ More New Magazines 

From here and there come tiny leaflets of local verse 
— for instance, The Bardy from Dallas, Texas; and The 
Poet's Scroll from Sherwood, Oklahoma. No strong 
evidence of genius in these, but they represent each a 
group and an aspiration. 



CORRESPONDENCE 

FROM THE PRESIDENT OF THE P. S. A. 

To the Editor: Please let me say a word as to your 
correspondent's report of the P. S. A. annual dinner. 

She begins with an interested reference to other dinners 
— banquets of Shoe-lace and Ribbon Manufacturers, 
Flower and Feather Manufacturers — which may have 
been held that evening at the Hotel Astor and which 
might have appealed to the avowed Rabelaisian taste of 
your reporter more than did the dinner which she attended. 
The poets were "decorous", she complains, they were 
"all in standardized evening array." So, as far as I 
could observe, in spite of her having written verse, was 
your reporter. 

She follows with a saucily lackadaisical account of the 
program, some of it accurate. The gist of the remarks 
that bored her was very much akin to the gist of the 
leading editorial in the April Poetry: "Local loyalties 
are turning with deep enthusiasm toward the arts." 
She would evidently prefer a clever monopoly — ^perhaps 

[III] 




 

in Chicago. She missed the deliberate intimation of the 
evening. Some of us realize that New York is quite 
as provincial as Chicago; and the Executive Committee 
deferred at the January dinner, all along the line, to 
speakers from the other provinces. 

She instances with relish Miss Lowell's challenge to 
the Society. Miss Lowell, a critic who has quaintly 
and ably won for herself the right to be blunt, assumed 
an absence of "sharp clash" and "critical emotional 
insight" from the Society's meetings and announced her 
preference, as one often does, for her own judgments and 
methods of expression. Miss Lowell was largely wrong 
in her assumption. Her "clash", this time, was rather 
flat than sharp, for the reason that she was recklessly 
judging, by meetings of other poetry groups, the regular 
sessions of the P. S. A., where there has certainly been 
more "sharp clash" than at any smaller contemporary 
gatherings of poets anywhere, whether public or private. 
As to "critical emotional insight", it is easier to talk 
about than to exhibit, especially at a dinner. 

Miss Dudley concedes "an hour of values contempla- 
tive and exciting." That seems to me a fair ratio in a 
professional program. She complains of "four hours 
of futility." During two of those hours, she and the 
"army captain" she mentions were free to contribute 
at their own table whatever they desired of Rabelaisian 
stimulus and general interest. If they chose to contribute 
"futility", it was their own fault. 


From the President of the P. S. A. 

Large dinners, whether social or professional, are not 
ideal means of intellectual or emotional exchange. In 
lieu of something better, they have become an occasional 
method of assemblage for the membership of organiza- 
tions. The P. S. A., in addition to its monthly meetings 
of give and take, chooses to listen quietly once a year 
to some group or other of members and guests. This 
year all the speakers, except Mn Chang Peng Chun, 
were Americans, from widely different parts of the country. 
There were no expatriates even. Only one of them had 
been heard before by the Society. Some of them may 
have been dull. So were some of their critics. But 
none of the speakers, if you will forgive me, made the 
lapse of mistaking mere smart distemper for "critical 
emotional insight." 

That sort of lapse, if you will forgive me again, is becom- 
ing too frequent in the pages of Poetry. Miss Dudley is 
not the only offender. Are there no stages, dear editor, 
between the stodgy and the supercilious? Are there 
no happier ways of avoiding one kind of emptiness than 
by substituting another? Is sharp crash valuable to you? 
Must a crackling of thorns boil the pot and the poet? 
Is even prose less important than pose? Should a 
magazine which has shown signs of health permit itself 
these amusing but unlovely sounds of literary indigestion? 

Incidentally let me thank you for printing in a recent 
issue an honest and thoughtful article by Mr. Baker 
Brownell. Witter Bynner 



A WORD FOR MR. GUEST 



To the Editor: I suppose you will hardly care to print a 
brief protest against your condemnation of Mr. Guest. 
Let me say at once that I entirely agree with you that 
his verses are not poetry, perhaps not even literature, 
in your and my sense of the term. Neither is the bulk 
of Longfellow. Yet both Longfellow and Mr. Guest 
touch the human heart in a fashion quite out of the 
reach of most of the estimable writers who monthly 
adorn your pages. Mr. Guest's trivial little poems impart 
something — perhaps not much, but something — of the 
sweet high consecration of rhythmic ecstasy to the 
common things that make up the daily experience of 
millions of readers who would be quite insensible to 
Ezra Pound and Amy Lowell. Also, I think you vastly 
over-estimate the importance of Mr. Guest's reward. 
It is precisely proportioned to his production: dull, sordid 
dollars, and the loud vociferation of the thick-breathed 
vulgar which your finer-natured poets would instinctively 
disdain. And I disagree totally with your view that Mr. 
Guest is a menace to literature. On the contrary, I do 
not believe that his verses distract one single reader from 
a better order of poetry, while they may lure many 
readers, through the medium of his rather obvious music, 
to something much more worth while. Surely you do not 
imagine that, if Mr. Guest were altogether eliminated 
from a world of which I esteem him a considerable bene- 
factor, the circulation of Poetry would be increased by 


A Word for Mr. Guest 

a single subscriber. Those who read Guest will never 
read Sandburg, and those who read Sandburg will never 
read Guest. Why not let each reader have what appeals 
to him and helps him ? Gamaliel Bradford 

NOTES 

The initial Blindman Prize of J250 has been awarded by the Poetry 
Society of South Carolina to Grace Hazard G)nkling, for Variations on 
a Themey which was named by Miss Lowell^ the appointed judge, as 
the best of many poems submitted in a contest open to all poets 
writing in English. 

Mr. William H. Simpson, of Chicago, who has appeared in Poetry 
before, has been for years in the service of the Santa Fe railroad, of 
which he is advertising manager. Extensive travels on and from this 
road have interested him in our south-western wonderland and its 
aboriginal life. Mr. Simpson used to write verses in his youth, and 
of late he has resumed the art more seriously. 

Mr. Carlyle Mclntyre, of Los Angeles, has also appeared in Poetry, 
but has not yet published a volume. A book, published some years 
ago by a poet of almost identical name, is not his. 

Mr. Glenn Ward Dresbach, of El Paso, Texas, will soon issue his third 
book, In Colors oj the West (Henry Holt & Co.). 

Mr. David Greenhood, now a resident of San Bernardino, Cal., 
was a member of Witter Bynner's poetry class at the University of 
California a few years ago. 

Flora Shufelt Rivola (Mrs. Charles) of Yankton, S. D., is another 
familiar contributor. 

The other poets of this month appear here for the first time. 

Mr. Raymond P. Fischer, formerly of Chicago, is now in Upland, Cal. 

Winifred Welles (Mrs. H. H. Shearer), of New York, is the author 
of The Hesitant Hearty published last year by B. W. Huebsch. 

Mr. Joseph Auslander, born in Philadelphia of Spanish and Russian 
parentage, and a graduate of Harvard, is now studying at Oxford, 
England. His poems have appeared in various magazines. 

Mr. Kemper Hammond Broadus is the young son of Edmund Kemper 
Broadus, of the faculty of the University of Manitoba in Alberta, who 
appeared in early numbers of Poetry, and who has just published a 
book on the Poets Laureate of England. 

Mr. John H. Gavin lives in Chicago, Miss Mildred Weston in Pitts- 
burgh, Pa. 

BOOKS RECEIVED . 
oiaoiNAL verse: 
Open ShutterSy by Oliver Jenkins. Will Ransom, Chicago. 
The Cockpit of Idols , by Muriel Stuart. Methuen & Co., Ltd., London. 
A Shropshire Lady by A. E. Housman. Henry Holt & Co. 
The fVildemesSy by George H. de la Vergne. Knickerbocker Press, 

New York. 
The Power of Love and Other VerseSy with Addenday by Irving S. Richter. 

Privately printed, Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Odes and LyricSy by Hartley Burr Alexander. Marshall Jones Co., 

Boston. 
Saturday Markety by Charlotte Mew. (New ed.) Macmillan Co. 
A Silver Poo/, by Beulah Field. Moffat, Yard & Co. 
Near Bethlehem and Other PoemSy by J. Edgar Smith. Privately printed, 

Washington, D. C. 
fVhite Aprily by Harold Vinal. {yale Series of Younger Poets,) Yale 

University Press, New Haven, Conn. 
Kinfolksy by Ann Cobb. Houghton Mifflin Co. 

ANTHOLOGIES AND TRANSLATIONS: 

The Book of American Negro Poetry, edited by James Weldon Johnson. 

Harcourt, Brace & Co. 
A Chapbooky by seven students of the University of Columbia, 

Vancouver, B. C. 
The Divine Comedy of Dante Alighieri (line for line Translation), by 

Melville Best Anderson. Worid Book Co., New York, N. Y. 
plays: 
The Last Voyage of OdysseuSy by Perry Boyer Comeau. Old Tower 

Plays, Chicago. 
Portrait of Mrs. fF,y by Josephine Preston Peabody. Houghton Mifflin 

Co. 

[Il6] 



 



WE ARE IN THE MARKET FOR 



GREETING CARD VERSE SUITABLE 



FOR ALLOCCASIONSICHRISTMAS 



VALENTINE DAY, EASTER, MOTHERS 
DAY ETC.FEACH VERSE MUST 



BE BRIEF-NOT MORE THAN SIX 



OR EIGHT LINES "AND MUST 



CONTAIN A DEFINITE MESSAGE? 
NO GENERALITIES . HOWEVER 



GLAMOROUS OR GLITTERING.. 



IP HEADS IN THE CLOUDS IF YOU 



WISH.BUT FEET ON THE EARTH 



ATALLTIMES..IPBE SIMPLE 



HUMAN, IMAGINATIVE AND 



APPEALING.1* PROMPT CONSID^ 



ERATION AND REMUNERATION. 



P.FVOLLAND COMPANY 



58 E Washington Street, Chicago 



 



We Are Backing the Poets— %fi»^ 
Are You Backing Us? 



For a verse-writer to be printed in POETRY is about the 

most honorable of recognitions. 

Ford Madox Hueffer in the New York 
Evening Post Literary Review: 

This monthly pubh'cation is an exhibition of literary faith 
and bravery that belong to the heroic age. 

The Daily Journal, East St. Louis. 

The varied interest and beauty presented are typical of 
POETRY'S quality. Thanks to a rare coincidence of 
poise and generous imagination, of sense and sensitiveness, 
it ranks easily as the best vehicle of poetry in the English 
language. 

From an editorial in the New York Sunday Tribune. 

POETRY has become a significant force 
in the intellectual life of America. That 
astute observer, the late William Marion 
Reedy, wrote: *Trobably Miss Monroe has 
done more for the high art of song than any 
other person in the United States" — a state- 
ment which has been generously supported 
by other commentators of similar prestige. 

POETRY: A Magazine of Verse 
I'Sl E. Erie St., Chicago 

Enclosed find $3.00 (Canada, $3.15; foreign, $3.25) 
for one year's subscription to POETRY. 

Beginning 

Name '. 

Address 



 



SPECIAL OFFER TO SUBSCRIBERS 
POETRY IS NOW $3.00 a year 

Bat for an Even FOUR DOLLARS 

sent for a new subscription, or a renewal, you may have 

POETRY for one year (pr'ce J3.00), and 
THE NEW POETRY — An Anthology 

(Macmillan Co. — 12.50 postpaid), a representative col- 
lection of contemporary verse edited by the editors of 
this magazine. The best modem anthology. 



STATEMENT OF THE OWNERSHIP, MANAQEMENT, CIRCULATION. ETC.. 
REQUIRED BY THE ACT OF CONGRESS OF AUGUST 24. 1912. 

Of Poetry. pubUshMl monthly at Chlcmso. 111., for April 1. 192S. 

State of Illlnola, County of Cook. Before me, a notary public In and for the 
State and county aforesaid, personally appeared Harriet Monroe, who, baring been 
duly sworn according to law, deposes and says that she Is the editor of Poetry, and 
that the following Is, to the best of her knowledge and belief, a true statement of the 
ownership, management, etc., of the aforesaid publication for the date shown In the 
abore caption, rsqulred by the Act of August 24, 1912. embodied In section 443, 
Postal Laws and Regulations, printed on the xererse of this form, to- wit: 

That the name and address of the publisher, editor, managing editor Is Harriet 
Monroe; business manager, Mlla Straub, 232 E. Erie street; owner, Harriet Mouroo. 

That there are no bondholders, mortgagees, and other seeuritj holders. 

That the two paragraphs next above, giving the names of the owners, stockholders, 
and security holders, if any, contain not only the list of stockholders and security 
holders as they appear upon the books of the company but also, in cases where the 
stockholder or security bolder appears upon the books of the company as trustee or In 
any other fiduciary relation, the name of the person or corporation for whom such 
trustee Is acting, is given; also that the two said paragraphs contain statements em- 
bracing affiant's full knowledge and belief as to the circumstances and conditions 
under which stockholders and security holders who do not appear upon the books of 
the company as trustees hold stock and securities in a capacity other than that of a 
bona fide owner; and this affiant has no reason to believe that any other person, 
association, or corporation has any Interest direct or indirect in the said stock, bonds, 
or other securities than aa so stated by her. 

HARBIET MONBOE (Owner). 

Sworn to and subscribed before me this 29th day of March, 1922. 

FBANK K. HAYS. 
(My commission expires January S9, 1924.) 



 



AT HOME AND FOUNTAIN 

BE SURE IT IS 

"Horlick's" 

The Original 
Malted Milk 

The Food-drink For AH Ages 

REFRESHES INVIGORATES 

FINEST QUALITY 



BOUND VOLUMES 
of POETRY 

Complete volumes of POETRY bound in buckram with 

Index and Title Page 
Vol. 1— October, 1912 {Reprint) to March, 1913.... W.7S 

All Other Volumes, Jl-XVIII/each 2.00 

The bound volumes of POETRY make a well-nigh com- 
plete collection of the best verse written in English since 
October, 1912. No library should be without diem. 

Binders* prices having advanced to more than twice what we originally 
paid, the above offer is scarcely higher than actual cost to us. Therefore ti 
does not include postage or expressage, which will be extra. Each volume 
wrapped, weighs 1}4 pounds. 

Subscribers may ha*ve their 9-wn copies of Poetry bound for the 
xact cost according to the binder's bill {Si^So or more for special 
orders). Or, if they return to us copies in perfect condition, nue 
luill send neiu ^volumes for Si*6o each, 

POETRY - - 232 E. ERIE STREET 



 



Vol. XX 




ALH-iS-ia.-! 



No. Ill 




A Magazine of Verse 
Edited by Harriet Monroe 

June 1922 



CoQveraation 

by Isidor Schneider 
A Mood 

by Jos. Andrew Galahad 
A SaUor's Note-book 

by Robert J. Roe 
Maxixe, by Osbert Sitwell 



232 East Erie Street. Chicago 
93.00 per Year Sintfle Numbers 2Sc 

itized by Google 



Digiti2 



 



How I wiih that imae BnilWi paper had anytUat Hke the autheotle vitality of 
PORBTI Limi$ GoUint 

Vol, XX No. Ill 

POETRY for JUNE, 1922 

PAGE 

G>nver8ation I-II — ^The Mist hidor Schneider 117 

A Mood Joseph Andrew Galahad 123 

Night Above the Tree Line Raymond Holden 124 

These Fields at Evening Daosd Morton 125 

Maxixe Oshrt SUwel! 126 

Friendship Daniel Henderson 127 

G)ckle Shells Elisabeth Coatsworth 128 

The Ship — ^The G>W8 — Stream — Broadway — At Versailles 

Portrait of a House— The Last of the G)wboy8 

Mary Carolyn Davies 131 

Your Words Athena McFadden 134 

Owl-blasted John McClure 135 

Fantasy Helen C. Russmann 136 

Two Poems Kathryn White Ryan 137 

Moonlight — Convent 

Three Poems Aha N. Turner 138 

Old Age— Our Sorrow — Margarette 

Suggestions Meredith Beyers I41 

Bit of Curls— Fat Man 

A Sailor's Note-book Robert J. Roe 142 

Typhoon — ^Sea I-III — ^Wind I-III — Moon — Cautious — ^Appa- 
rition — Sailor — Barney — ^Insight — ^Jock — Stars — Meinself 

Prosody /f. Af. 148 

Reviews: 

Charlotte Mew Marion Strobel 152 

A Spirit of Quest Emanuel Camevali 155 


Slight Songs Muna Lee 160 

A Japanese Cosmopolite Jun Fujita 162 

Dante in English Rhyme Henry B, Fuller 165 

Correspondence: 

A Word from Mr. Untermeyer . . .- Louis Untermeyer 168 

Robert Bums Wilson A Kentuckian 171 

Notes and Books Received 172, 174 

Manuscripts most be aoeompaoied by a tfeamped and self-addrened envelope. 
Indmive yeariy sobscription rates. In the united States. Ueiloo, Cuba and 
AsMrican powtiiiom, ^.00 net; in Canada. ^.15 net; in all other eonatrics in the 
tal Ualoa. $3.25 net. Bntered as seooad-dasi matter Nov. 15. 1912. at the 
" le. at Chlcaao. HI., under Act of Mareh 3. 1879. 

Published monthly at 131 East Erie St.» Chicago, 111. 

Cs^yKfte /Ma. *y ITarfM Jtfoarof. Att Hthta rettmd. 



Boetiy 

ANfagazine of Vene 



Vol. XX 
No. Ill 



JUNE 1922 



CONVERSATION 



SUPPOSE," he thought, " there are invisible beings, 
fairies, elves; 
Suppose rheumatism is nothing but Robin-pinches; 
Suppose a wind is only the beating of fairy wings 
And fairy fingers dofiing your hat to invisible majesties." 

He sat on the bench motionless. 

The dust sifted upon him, 

Leaves caught upon his clothing, 

Vagrant sheets of paper wrapped about his feet. 

"Chance is decent and does not leave the silent things 

exposed. 
She covers the stone with moss, and spreads 
A coverlet of mold upon the unmoving things. 

"Suppose I stayed here a year? 

Would the elves come and cover me with leaf drift, and 

dust 
Carefully shaken over me? 
Would they sow seeds under my feet? 
Would the moss grow from the clay on the soles of my 

shoe? 
Would I be wound in spider-webs?" 

II 

Another one sat down beside him 

And cut his world in two. 

He moved back as if to drag back the severed half. 

But the other one held it tenaciously. 

His very shadow was a seal of possession, ineffaceable. 

For a moment they sat still, taut. 

Like two who tug at a rope. . 

"Pleasant day?" 

"Pleasant day!" 

And so they fused their world with sticky speech. 

" I was wondering how it would be 

To be a year in one place — 

For the rain to soften you, and the wind to mold you. 

And the dust to fill in your cracks." 

"You would be a tree then: 

["8] 



 



Isidor Schneider 

Your toes would drip into roots; 

Your arms would be long brown branches 

Holding leaves like cups to fill with sunlight and dew." 

"If I were silent 

The ininsible realms would open about me; 

The unseen people would buUd a road between my feet — 

They would build a city in the shadow of my knees. 

Like cities built below mountains. 

I might be their sphinx, satiate with questions." 

"There is no invisible world 

Except the worlds you do not see. 

These can be reached by travel. 

Your stillness will not be inviolate — 

All things using life will apportion you 

With shrewd husbandry: 

The birds will inherit your head and your shoulders; 

Hungry things will hot spare you; 

Insects and beasts will dispute your flesh, 

And bound your body for dwelling-places." 

"There is no need of travel — 

Stillness will invite these other worlds 

That are delayed by distance. 

The wind will plant about my feet 

Their final flowers; 

The rivers will wash their soil under my roots; 

The travel-urge will throw 

Their curious sampled people out to me. 
The other worlds I mean are mixed with this — 
They course within our life 
Like floods within the ocean." 

" I do not think these things — 

They walk like strangers out beyond my mind; 

Only of this world, which I see suddenly 

Like clouds disclosed by lightnings. 

Love came to me suddenly; 

Hatred armed my hands once, 

And I knew remorse. 

Hunger and a red wound 

Taught me the thin texture of life." 

"They say the sky is distance only. 

And the color of distance is blue. 

And that is why violets, who have the distance of fragility. 

Are blue. 

Since there are larger worlds around us 

There must be smaller other-worlds within us. 

If one could find them." 

"We who are within the waiting-rooms of existence 

Should not peer into the deeper halls. 

Nor tempt the attendants with our lauding curiosity." 

"Can you not watch how the ceilings and the walls 

Mark the backs of other rooms? 

Can you not let your mind tentatively therein?" 


Isidor Schneider 

"No — I would still suspect it." 

"Well—?" 

"Well— ni be going; good-day?" 

"Good day!" 

And one man walked away, brushing from ^im crawling 

words; 
While the other sat still, 
Wiping from his world 
The stains of conversation. 



THE MIST 

Is death a mist 

In which life becomes invisible? 

Yesterday 

The world ended in mist. 

It lay shrunken by immobility 

Into a gray cofEn. 

The steeple rose. 

Prodded and pricked the mist 

Like a question 

Investigating doubt. 

Its dim spire 

[I2lj 




 

Found the horizon new arranged 

In stories. 

The world became strange, 

Ungrateful 

Of the jagged lights 

That seamed its veils. 

To me, walking. 

The long road unravelled 

A guiding string; 

And my eyes 

Carried before and behind 

Its constant small visibility. 

I faced the mist-made microcosm — 

Where pebbles are boulders, 

Puddles lakes, 

Sidewalk-cracks long chasms. 

The curb a precipice; 

Where towers flew. 

Roofs floated like rafts; 

And smoke wreaths 

Were like dark veins 

Under a skin. 

Is death a mist 

In which life becomes invisible? 

Isidor Schneider 

[122 J 



 



A MOOD 

I am sad for the beauty that is dead: 

For the sunset that I saw tonight 

As I walked on a hill. 

For the tangle of clouds in the light 

Where the rim of the sun was showing still. 

For the breath of a lily slim and pale 
That I brought from the forest yesterday. 
For the song of a lark on an old fence rail; 
For a ground-wren's nest in the last year's hay. 

For three slim dogwoods on a mountain-side. 
Like ghost trees whitely nodding at the grass; 
For a field of buttercups upon a river bank — 
For a jaybird jeering shrilly as we pass. 

For a wild rose by an alder tree — 
For a ginger bloom more fragrant than the rose. 
For a swallow sailing by with sapphire wings 
Where a waterlily in the shallows grows. 

For all the things that are passing and are fair; 
For the shortness of the hour that gave them birth. 
For the paucity of human hearts that care; 
For all the things that are only of the earth. 

I am sad for the beauty that is dead. 

Joseph Andrew Galahad 

NIGHT ABOVE THE TREE LINE 

You berries^ that are full of the dark dusks 
Of mountains and the moisture of chill dews. 
Swell on your stems and break your ripened husks 
For lips which it would wither you to lose — 
If there are lips to what is wandering here 
Feeling you underfoot in the rocky night. 
Moving about like "wind, blowing you clear 
Of mists, hanging your leaves with drops of light. 

Listen! There is a sound of water falling 
Down the dark-shafted night into the trees. 
Wild birds that should be quiet now are calling. 
How shall I sleep tonight, troubled with these? 
The cool wind through the moon's invisible strings 
Blows like a striking of dear silver bars; 
The great black peak shudders and leaps and swings, 
And I am blinded by the fall of stars. 

I cannot rest. I cannot quiet my limbs. 
A sense of climbing keeps my body burning, 
And the white flame sweeps over me and dims 
All that inclines within me toward returning. 
Did I see only earth once long ago. 
And only flesh in faces turned to me? 
Sleep? Rest? With my senses shaken so 
And the world's valleys lost so dizzily? 


Raymond Holden 

Why have I come so near the fearful stars 
When what is in me is so much a want 
Of utter dark too thick for any wars 
Of flesh and spirit dazzlingly to haunt? 
I do not know. I do not want to know; 
Only to make a fire of weariness 
And fling myself upon it» and burn, and go 
Thinly, like smoke, to wind-walled quietness. 

Raymond Holden 



THESE FIELDS AT EVENING 

These wear their evening light as women wear 
Their pale proud beauty for some lover's sake, 
Too quiet-hearted evermore to care 
For moving worlds and musics that they make; 
And they are hushed as lonely women are — 
So lost in dreams they have no thought to mark 
How the wide heavens blossom, star by star, 
And the slow dusk is deepening to the dark. 

The moon comes like a lover from the hill. 
Leaning across the twilight and the trees; 
And finds them grave and beautiful and still. 
And wearing always, on such nights as these, 
A glimmer less than any ghost of light. 
As women wear their beauty through the night. 

David Morton 

MAXIXE 

Los enanitos 
Se enojaren 

{Old Mexican Song) 

The Mexican dwarfs can dance for miles. 

Stamping their feet and scattering smiles; 

Till the loud hills laugh and laugh again 

At the dancing dwarfs in the golden plain. 

Till the bamboos sing as the dwarfs dance by 

Kicking their feet at a jagged sky. 

That, torn by leaves and gashed by hills. 

Rocks to the rhythm the hot sun shrills. 

The bubble sun sketches shadows that pass 

To noiseless jumping-jacks of glass 

So long and thin, so silent and opaque, 

That the lions shake their orange manes, and quake, 

And a shadow that leaps over Popocatepetl 

Terrifies the tigers, as they settle 

Cat-like limbs cut with golden bars 

Under bowers of flowers that shimmer like stars. 

Buzzing of insects flutters above. 

Shaking the rich trees' treasure-trove 

Till the fruit rushes down, like a comet whose tail 

Thrashes the night with its golden flail. 

The fruit hisses down with a plomp from its tree. 

Like the singing of a rainbow as it dips into the sea. 

Loud red trumpets of great blossoms blare 


Osbert Sitwe/l 

Triumphantly like heralds who blow a fanfare; 
Till the humming-bird> bearing heaven on its wing» 
Flies from the terrible blossoming, 
And the humble honey-bee is frightened by the fine 
Honey that is heavy like money, and purple like wine; 
While birds that flaunt their pinions like pennons 
Shriek from their trees of oranges and lemons. 
And the scent rises up in a cloud, to make 
The hairy swinging monkeys feel so weak 
That they each throw down a bitten cocoanut or mango. 
Up flames a flamingo over the fandango; 
Glowing like a fire, and gleaming like a ruby. 
From Guadalajara to Guadalupe 
It flies; in flying drops a feather . . . 
And the snatching dwarfs stop dancing and fight together. 

Osieri Sitwell 



FRIENDSHIP 

No foe could strike this blow — 

Could draw this blood, this tear! 
By the deep wound I know 

A friend was here. 

Daniel Henderson 
COCKLE SHELLS 

THE SHIP 

"The sky is great and the land is great and the ocean is 

great," said he; 
''And a bird is a lovely thing in the air, and a supple fish 

in the sea; 
And a horse is a beautiful thing to watch, running so 

gay and free. 

"But a ship that is built of land-grown oak, with her 

sails in the wind," said he, 
"And who goes and comes in the very thick of the calm 

and storm of the sea. 
Is light as a bird and swift as a fish, and like a horse runs 

free!" 

THE cows 

I have seen cows that lay in the summer meadows. 

Hearing the sound of breezes amidst the grass 

While every hair in the sunlight glittered with rainbows. 

Oh, but they were bland and placid and smooth and 

beautiful! 
Their mates were great bulls with curl-matted horns 
And the bellow of lions. 
Their offspring were playful and gay, 


Elizabeth Coatsworth 

With innocent staring eyes. 

Laborers toiled in the fields to find them food for the 

winter, 
And built them against the wind dark temples scented 

with hay; 
While women eased them of milk 
That swelled their udders at twilight. 
I have seen cows that lay in the meadows like gods, 
Breathing forth peace that smelled of dampness and 

clover. 

STREAM 

Like a troubadour riding to battle, 

Flinging his sword in the air 

And catching it 

As he sings. 

The stream comes in white armor down the hillside. 

BROADWAY 

That man has the head of a goat and the paunch of Silenus, 
As he walks down the sidewalk alone conventionally 

going to dine. 
His little bright eyes are glancing, his little hard feet are 

prancing 
As though all the crowd about him were maenads and 

fawns in a line. 

The horns of the motors for him are puffed by the cheeks 

of centaurs; 
The buildings and shops are cliffs, draped and festooned 

with the vine. 
The little cane that he swings he has used on the ribs of 

his donkey 
When the ground was rocking with laughter and the trees 

were reeling with wine. 

AT VERSAILLES 

I have watched the hours pass along the walks of Versailles 

Among the drifting autumn leaves: 

Madame Four-O'Clock a tumble of silken skirts and smiles, 

On a donkey her lover lured forward with brown southern 
pears. 

Madame Five-0'Clock, pouting among the petunias; 

Flower-face, flower-hands, flower-breasts barely sheathed 
in her bodice. 

Madame Six-0'Clock languishing by a balustrade, 

Her thin yellow hand on the head of a black page. 

And Madame Seven, a white shadow among the tree- 
trunks. 

As still and as arch as the statues upon their p>edestals. 

Elizabeth Coatstoorth 




PORTRAIT OF A HOUSE 

Far from a town 

I know a house that's a girl's dream come true. 

And there is one room done in blue> 

In queer still blues, with shades drawn down. 

In a room near 

Are candles, thick as a man's arm, 
Of yellow wax, and then a warm 
Great golden bowl of burning bloom; 
And past, there is a little room 
For tea, and being glad and proud 
One is alive. There is a crowd 
Of tall flowers shaken as with fear 
Outside a door. And walking by 
Three great windows filled with sky. 
We came to a Chinese room 
Where a Buddha sits in gloom. 
He is as still as witchery 
But in his eyes weird things I see. 
Like the waiting to be wild 
In the eyes of a young child. 

Past this room arc wonders still — 
Altar vestures from Brazil, 
Blue and silver ones and red; 
She loves old rich things. She said, 
"Cream or lemon in your tea?" 

In a strange laughing voice. She has 
Dusk eyes, I think, or maybe blue. 
And a heart for telling secrets to. 

A bear-skin out of- Russia yawns 

On her wide hall. There have been dawns 

A-many on her waiting lawns. 

The rocky cliffside, glacier-scarred, 
And mountain trails are in her yard. 
The widest river of the west 
Goes past her door. There is a jest 
In all she does, and a greatness too. 
And little gardens hidden where 
Her guests find them unaware. 

Gravely in the court beyond 
Her gardeners have made a pond 
Where waterlilies were, and where 
They are gone now, except two rare 
And perfect ones, like trembling young 
Shy things; and deep and red among 
The lily roots the goldfish go 
In a discontented row. 
Breaking and wheeling. A white wall 
Bears bowls of trailing vines. There fall 
Out of the air great seagulls. High 
Cliffs and rough crags break up the sky. 
Across the river; and beyond 



 



Mary Carolyn Davits 



The level lawn, the level pond, 

The mountain rises menacing; 

And a great waterfall comes down 

Like a sullen tiger's spring. 

I have watched her calm eyes cling 

To the waterfall — while slow 

And sweet she spoke, in her still way, 

Of books and men that we two know. 

Prisoner in her house she dwells. 
As do we all. Our rooms are cells. 
Loveliness is only bars 
To shut out faces from the stars. 



THE LAST OF THE COWBOYS 

They have gone down like the sunset, who like the sun 
Were mighty and high and scornful; their hour is done. 
Slowly into the night they ride, each one. 

They have gone down like the sunset, sharp on the hill. 
A moment against the sky they stood, until 
The dark came down and they met it, stoic and still. 

Mary Carolyn Davies 



YOUR WORDS 

God gave you wordSy so you must give them to me. 

Let me lie here on the ground 

Breaking brittle pine-needles with my fingers. 

You have no right to keep a gift — 

God gave you words ^ so you must give them to me. 

Your words are perfect things — 
They are birds with full smooth breasts. 

That fly in wide clean skies 
And sleep in warm brown nests. 

Your words are little globes 

Of glasSy or ruby-flake; 
They tinkle in the air 

And whisper as they break. 

Your words are little ships 

With silver shining sails, 
That sing against the winds 

Like purple nightingales. 

Your words are colored fruits 

In crystal jars, and tail. 
You break them with your lips; 

I catch them as they fall. 

So give me your words. Let them slip 
Cool fingers through my hair. 


Athena McFadden 

There is no world but me, no heaven but you. . . 
Somewhere outside of these there may be birds y 
And fruity and ships y and little crystal globes. 

For me there are only your words. . . 

Athena McFadden 



OWI^BLASTED 

** Farmer Hunt doubted whether there really mere any tongs which he 
seemed to hold in his hand. • . . . Ah^ these solid houses ^ real estates y 
have wings like so many nimble mosquitoesy and do exceedingly hop and 
avoid met" — Emerson's Journals, 

"You can trap no sweet 
From such nimble things — 

They have goblin feet. 
They have goblin wings. 

"Chase them everywhere, 

Everywhere they flee: 
Emptier than air 

Are the world and we." 

Who has heard the madmen 

Shall remember long 
AU their goblin music 

And their goblin song. 

John McClure 

h35l 



 



POETRY; A Magazine of Verse 

FA>rrASY 

High in the cloudy skies. 

Along the barren hills. 

Where short brown grass grows sparingly and spots of 

orange earth shine forth, 
Where trees of sombre brown uprise. 
Fantastic horses roam. 

Cropping the scanty grass. 

Their full white tails blown outward by the wind. 

They move about majestically with slow and tranquil step. 

Their necks are strangely thin and beautiful. 
Their fiery eyes, fixed steadily on the ground, 
Seem to be contemplating inward wonders. 
With their unshod hoofs they leave no mark on the 
bare hard earth. 

Slowly they move. 

With their heads bent downward 

Munching the short spare grass, 

While the passing clouds, grey with incipient storm, 

Hang low over the hills. 

They know no day nor night, 

Those pale fantastic horses; 

For daylight on the hills is but a cloud-grey shadow. 

And night is faintly luminous with livid mist. 


Helen C, Russmann 

Slowly they roam, 

With their unsleeping eyes fixed inward. 

Treading with easy step the inaccessible heights, 

Moving in tranquil peace 

Along the cloudy hills. 

Helen C. Russmann 



TWO POEMS 

MOONLIGHT 

It has covered the earth as this sheet my knee 
Where my body lies like a reed in snow. 
It has altered my room to a satin tomb. 
It has made of my soul a silver flute — 
A silver flute in a white case, mute; 
A silver flute filled with prisoned song. 
Long shrill song for your lips to free. 

CONVENT 

As into a blue lake 

The little drops of days 

Fall quietly. 

The lake fills but does not stir. 

Kathryn White Ryan 




POETRY: /f Magazine of Verse 
THREE POEMS 

OLD AGE 

Drink. 

The fountain is bending low. 
It is being filled with emptiness. 
The day is spilling its light. 

Drink, 

Bending the unyielding knee. 

There's a tremor 

In the thought of height — 

The snow of the years is fallen. 

Drink. 

The black shadows are toppling 

Over into thin waters. 

In the night. 

When thou art removed 

From the fountain. 

Thy thirst will cease to be 

A burden. 

A vision shall fill the night. 

OUR SORROW 

Your sorrow died, 
And you buried it; 

ri38j 



 



Aha N. Turner 



And then you dried 

Your tears 

As you went your way 

Forgetting it: 

While mine lives through the years. 

Men understood your sorrow 

Because it died, 

And pitied your tears. 

Which you have dried; 

But they leer at my sorrow 

And sneer, 

Because it lives through the years. 



MARGARETTE 

She's a clever little witch. 

And knows it; 

But it has not spoiled her heart. 

The beauty of her tressed head 

Is enhanced by the cunning of her fingers. 

Her piquant and mobile face 

Reflects 

The sunshine of her soul. 

And betrays the clouds of it. 

I like to study her face. 

[139J 




 

Her sky-blue eyes 

Vie with the softness 

Of the summer heavens, 

When the nimbus has fled 

And cumulus dreams on the sky-line. 

The naif beauty of her white teeth 

Remains intact, 

And laughs 

At the dedal ruse of the dentist. 

Last Sunday, at the spring 

Which pours its potable silver 

For the mendicant town of Spring Garden, 

She said with a smile. 

Before Lillian and the others. 

That she believed 

She'd made a great hit with me. 

I mocked the smile of her. 

And confessed that she had. 

She's twenty and Fm forty — 
But that's no difference to her; 
For she's a clever little witch. 
And knows it. 

Alva N. Turner 




SUGGESTIONS 

BIT OF CURLS 

Furious little bit of curis 
Struggling against the gale! 

Mad at God because the wind 
Is stronger than her tiny body. 

But little girl. 

You do not have to! 

Turn about, • 

And let it take you. 

Fluttering, laughing, 

Over the prairie, 

Butterflying through the air. 

FAT MAN 

Shall we worship you 
As god of Laughter 
And Good-nature — 
Or shall we crisp your flesh 
As sacrificial offering 
To Bacchus! 

Meredith Beyers 




. 




 
A SAILOR'S NOTE-BOOK 

TYPHOON 

I have heard many men in many tongues 

Hollering for something they wantit. 

Un I have heard the typhoon 

Quarrelling with his brother the sea 

On the lee beaches. 

"This is mine island,'* says Typhoon. 

"Is mine," says the sea. 

"I bring birds what makes trees." 

"I pile sand for to make beaches." 

"Is mine what for I love it." 

"Is mine what for I marry it." 

Typhoon takeit island by trees. 
Sea grab at the beaches. 
Un when they is through — 
Palms piled like jack-straws, 
Beaches pulled to pieces. 

SEA 



Sea is dumb fellow, 

Which don't know what he wants 

Un is not happy. 

1142] 



 



Robert J. Roe 



II 



Sea is wie bucket full with gold-dust, 

Un ship is little piece of dirt 

What Somebody would snap out pretty soon 

With His finger. 



Ill 



Sea is still 

Wie God was asleep. 

Sometimes he breathes very slow. 



WIND 



Wind hunches his shoulders, 

Un shivers behind deck>house. 

He would like to be im tropics now. 

II 

Wind jumps at the luflF of sails, 

Slides down on his belly 

With legs all spread-eagled, 

Tumbles off boom, 

Un goes round un round companionway- 

Like crazy cat shasing his tail. 



III 



Wind is lazy stevedore 

Which comes along 

Un dumps sacks of spices, 

Un shuffles away singing, 

"Yankee ship came down the river/* 



MOON 



When moon comes up on dark sea 
It is wie woman's hair 
In mine face. 

CAUTIOUS 

Im foggy night 

Ship goes along 

Wie nice girl which is got by mistake 

Im sailors' boarding-house 

Un sneaks out after dark. 

Her dress makesit small slippery noise, 
Un boards squeak in rotten floor 
From hall-way. 

APPARITION 

Deck was dark wie inside of cow 

Robert J. Roe 



Un she came like Holy Mary 
In a light dress. 

I wantit then to pray 

But could not, 

Whatfor I have been sailor too long. 

SAILOR 

Sometimes I would rather be sailor 

Wie king. 

Whatfor when all hands sets the courses, 

I am not one man 

But eight. 

BARNEY 

Barney is bad watch-mate, 
Whatfor I do many times his work 
Un hate him for it. 

But when I go out on jib-boom 

Im squally night 

To makeit fast the headsails, 

Un sea takes me in his mouth 

Up to mine waist 

Un spits me out again, 

Barney is like angel 

Sweating in cold blow. 

INSIGHT 

Im Wellington port I quarrel with Alec 

If ship is French or Swede full>rigger. 

I get mighty hot, 

Un Alec get pretty mad. 

Un all of sudden I hear us 

Like somebody was cracking straws in mine ear. 

Un I let Alec say I am wrong. 

JOCK 

They ask me why I get drunk, 

Un I tell them: 

Whatfor when I come im port 

I carry all the sea across mine shoulders 

Un wouldn't nobody help me; 

Only Jock, the bar-man. 

Smiles un takes load 

Un puts im corner. 

When mine money is all gone 
Jock gives me back the sea. 



STARS 



I lie on mine back 
Un look at stars — 



[146I 



 



Robert J. Roe 



So bright, so thick, 

Sailing like Portugee men-o'-wars; 

Un I ask myself how many stars can be 

Un how far. 

But I am only one little man 

On one little ship 

Sailing ninety days to one port, 

Un I think I am mighty big business. 

Stars ain't Portugee men-oVwars. 



MEINSELF 

Sometimes I say to meinself, 
"lamMichaelisKerek.'' 
But it don't sound true. 

You believe me when I say it — 
Whatfor you got to believe it. Bob. 
But there is many millions men 
What never see me. 

What is Michaelis Kerek for them? 

Robert J. Roe 


COMMENT 

PROSODY 

A RECENT discussion of prosody in The Freeman 
brought so many disputants to the fore, each with 
a different point of view, as to remind at least one of 
them of the welter of chaos and confusion in which that 
so-called science finds itself foundering today. Since poets 
and scholiasts are so at loggerheads about the funda- 
mental technique of the verse-art practiced by the one 
group and analyzed by the other, it may be well to 
remind ourselves of the basic origins of rhythm, and of 
the history, not of poetry itself, but of the system of laws 
formulated and developed by grammarians from the study 
of poetry. 

Rhythm is of course a universal principle, the very 
pulse-beat of life and of all the arts. From the amoeba 
to man, from the atom to the star, rhythm, or power 
moving regularly in time-beats, is a recognizable law 
which all creation must obey. The more closely modern 
science studies the universe — through microscope, tele- 
scope, or the naked eye and brain of man — the more 
astonishing and magnificent becomes this infinite har- 
mony: an intricate weaving of small patterns within 
great ones, a march of ordered melody, outreaching 
human eyes and ears, outracing even that "only reality" 
the human imagination. The arts are an effort to join 
in, to weave little imitation patterns, sound little imita- 


Prosody 

don tunes. Even the static arts must respond with 
balanced form and color in painting, sculpture, architec- 
ture — else their manifestations are temporary and in- 
congruous, part of the perishable scum and waste. 

Music and poetry seem to have been among the earliest 
and most direct human manifestations of the universal 
rhythmic impulse. At first they were united — lyric rap- 
ture instinctively fitted words to melody, as it does still 
in certain forms of spontaneous folk-song like keening 
over the dead or other primitive rhapsodies of prayer and 
praise. But as life became more complex, the two arts 
separated, developed each its own imaginative and techni- 
cal expression of the rhythmic instinct. Literature began 
in the creation of poems too beautiful to be left to chance 
memories and tongues, and therefore committed to writ- 
ing. After the passing centuries had heaped up an 
accumulation of these masterpieces, the analysts took 
hold of them; and out of the practice of dead poets 
grammarians began to make rules for poets yet to come. 

Thus prosody was born. And thus gradually it 
developed into a rigid science of verse-structure, a science 
about as scientific, from the modern point of view, as 
the astronomy or chemistry of the classic and mediaeval 
periods. For a brief review of its history one need go 
no further than Edmund Gosse's article on Verse in the 
Britannica. It was Aristoxenus of Tarentum, a gram- 
marian contemporary with Alexander the Great and 
therefore much later than the golden age of Greek poetry, 

who "first laid down definite laws for prosody as a depart- 
ment of musical art.'* From his time 

The theories of verae tended to release themselves from the theories 
of music. Rules, often of a highly arbitrary nature, were drawn up 
by grammarians, who founded their laws on a scholiasdc study of the 
ancient poets. 

One Hephaestion wrote a manual of Greek metres in 
the second century A. D., which became an authority 
in both the Byzantine and the Alexandrian schools, and, 
printed at last in 1526, carried on his influence into 
modern languages. Of the elaborate system of classic 
verse-structure set forth by these and other analysts Mr. 
Gosse reminds us: 

It must not be forgotten that the prosodical terminology of the Greeks, 
which b often treated by non-poetical writers as something scientific 
and even sacrosanct, dates from a time when ancient literature had lost 
all its freshness and impulse, and was exclusively the study of analysts 
and grammarians. 

However, the classic nomenclature — the dactyls, ana- 
paests, spondees, iambs, etc., of Greek and Latin, languages 
whose syllabic quantities were fairly rigid — was carried 
over into modern tongues of much more changeable 
quantities and emphatic stresses. Naturally it has proved 
a misfit; especially in English it is inaccurate and mis- 
leading — a mediaeval remainder strangely anachronistic 
in this age of scientific research. It has been a hampering 
influence, and would have be^n perhaps a destructive one 
if the poets, most of them, had not preserved either an 
invincible ignorance or a cold-hearted indifiFerence against 


Prosody 

all the wiles of prosodic theory. I know two or three of 
high distinction who don't know an iamb from a cellar- 
door, and couldn't scan their poems according to formula 
to save their necks from the Lord High Executioner. 

But this virginal innocence, however desirable in the 
face of a false prosody, might learn much to its advantage 
from a prosody as accurate and scientifically complete as 
the system of musical notation which has so enormously 
stimulated musical production. As I said in the Freeman: 

In any inquiry into poetic rhythms, one is seriously handicapped 
by the ineuctness of the old terms. Prosody, regarded as the science 
of versfr-notation, is today about as scientific as pre-Galilean astronomy. 
Its inherited ancient terms — ^iambic, trochaic, anapaestic, dactylic, etc. — 
deserve no better fate than the scrap-heap, after which a modern science 
of prosody might be built upon sound foundations. Indeed, a begin- 
ning has been made. There is quite a bibliography of scientific articles 
by philologists, chiefly German, on the subject of speech-rhythms 
and verse-rhythms; and Dr. William Morrison Patterson, formerly of 
Columbia University, has made a most valuable contribution in his 
volume, The RhytJsm of Prose^ and in the phonographic researches 
which led up to it. In reviewing thb book in April, 191 8, 1 said: 

"I am quite out of sympathy with those sensitive poetic souls who 
resent this intrusion of science. The truth can do no harm, and in 
this case it must do incalculable good in the enrichment of our sense 
of rhythmic values. The poet of the future, discarding the wilful 
empiricism of the past and proceeding upon exact knowledge, will greatly 
develop and enrich our language-rhythms just as music-rhythms are 
being devebped and enriched by composers fully educated in their art, 
who add knowledge and training to that primal impulse of heart and 
mind which we call genius. The poet hitherto has worked in the dark, 
or at least in a shadow-land illumined only by his own intuidon. 
Henceforth science will lend her lamp; she unll hand him the laws of 
rhythm just as she hands to the painter the laws of light and color, or 
to the architect the laws of proportion and stress." 

Of course modern investigators, including Mr. Bridges, recognize 
that even common human speech falls necessarily iiSto what Sievers 
calls SprechtakUy or speech-bars, rhythm being a universal law which 
prose must obey as well as poetry. So Nfr. Bridges b in accord with 
the scientists in declaring that "in English accentual measures the nat- 
ural speech-groupings must be supreme." 

Prof, Patterson's researches were interrupted a few 
years ago, unfortunately, by his resignation from the 
faculty of Columbia University. At present he is living 
in old Charleston, where, according to a recent letter, he 
hopes soon to resume his study of this subject. The 
work of a progressive scientific mind in this much-befc^ged 
specialty cannot fail to be illuminating. H. M. 



REVIEWS 

CHARLOTTE MEW 

Saturday Market^ by Charlotte Mew. Macmillan Co. 

A slim book of verse laden with so much observation, 
knowledge, passion, sentiment, that it is like an apple-tree 
burdened by the excess of its own beauty. Almost each 
poem has the material in it for innumerable poems, and 
almost each poem is weighed down with words. Yet 
though Miss Mew lacks simplicity, she never lacks interest. 
I think, in fact, that this book would appeal to a larger 
audience than any book of verse published in the past 
two years, with the possible exception of Edna St. Vin- 
cent Millay's Second April; because the poems tell stories, 


Charlotte Mew 

and tell them with genuine dramatic feeling. For in- 
stance. The Farmer* s Bride: 

Three summers since I chose a maid, 

Too young maybe — but more's to do 

At harvest-time than bide and woo. 

When us was wed she turned afraid 

Of love and me and all things human; 

Like the shut of a winter's day. 

Her smile went out, and 'twasn't a woman — 

More like a little frightened fay. 

One night, in the fall, she runned away. 

"Out 'mong the sheep her be," they said — 

Should properly have been abed. 

But sure enough she wasn't there, 

Lying awake with her wide brown stare. 

So over seven-acre field and up-along across the down 

We chased her flying like a hare 

Before our lanterns. To Church-town 

All in a shiver and a scare 

We caught her, fetched her home at last, 

And turned the key upon her fast. 

She does the work about the house 
As well as most, but like a mouse; 
Happy enough to chat and play 
With birds and rabbits and such as they. 
So long as men-folk keep away. 
"Not here, not here!" her eyes beseech 
When one of us comes within reach. 
The women say that beasts in stall 
Look round like children at her call, 
/'or hardly heard her speak at all. 

Shy as a leveret, swift as he, 

Straight and slight as a young larch tree, 

Sweet as the first wild violets, she. 
To her wild self. But what to me? 

The short days shorten and the oaks are brown. 
The blue smoke rises to the low grey sky, 
One leaf in the still air falls slowly down, 
A magpie's spotted feathers lie 
On the black earth spread white with rime. 
The berries redden up to Christmas time. 
What's Christmas time without there be 
Some other in the house than we I 

She sleeps up in the attic there 

Alone, poor maid. "Tis but a stair 

Betwixt us. O my God! the down. 

The soft young down of her, the brown. 

The brown of her — her eyes, her hair, her hair! 

The above, I think, shows Miss Mew at her best. She 
has taken one idea and has handled it with restraint. In 
the longer poems, such as Madeleine in Church and The 
^uiet Housey she is in danger of becoming melodramatic 
and verbose. And frequently she loses all sense of word- 
sound, as in the cacophanous ending of this stanza: 

Red is the strangest pain to bear: 

In spring the leaves on the budding trees; 

In summer the roses are worse than these, 

More terrible than they are sweet — 

A rose can stab you across the street 

Deeper than any knife. 

And the crimson haunts you ever3rwhere — 

Thin shafts of sunlight, like the ghosts of reddened swords, have 

struck our stair, 
As if, coming down, you had split your life. 

The final lines are as unpleasant to the ear as a finger- 

Charlotte Mew 

nail drawn across a blackboard; particularly as they 
follow lines of accurate beauty. 

Almost all of the poems are objective, which, in itself, 
is refreshing in this age when so many poets emphasize 
the diminutive iHutterings of their colossd ego. And the 
fact that Miss Mew successfully subordinates her own 
personality to that of the characters in her poems proves 
her a mature artist. There is nothing slap-dash about 
her, nothing young — her sophistication has mellowed to 
wisdom. And when she does not try to impart too much 
of her knowledge, we are exalted by it: 

Tide be runnin' the great world over: 

T'was only last June month I mind than we 

Was thinkin' the toss and the call in the breast of the lover 

So everlastin' as the sea. 

Here's the same little fishes that sputter and swim, 

Wi' the moon's old glim on the grey wet sand; 

An' him no more to me nor me to him 

Than the wind goin' over my hand. 

Marion Strobel 

A SPIRIT OF QUEST 

ExplorationSy by Robert McAlmon. Egoist Press, London. 
If poetry is an easily understood, self-fulfilling bead- 
string of so-called beautiful images that he who runs may 
read; if it implies not a continual rebellion to standardized 
beauty; if it should be simple and naive; then this bitter 
burning caustic stuff, the broken rhythm of it, the laby- 
rinthine sophistication of it, have nothing to do with 

[iSS] 




 

Pegasus. The old venerable horse would lose his head in 
it and get his hoofs scorched. McAlmon seeks — it is hard 
to say just what he seeks; there is a spirit of quest in this 
book. We might call it the struggle of the poet versus 
his own sophistication. For that he is a poet some lines 
tell even to the skeptical: 

Between sunrise and sunrise any life is left pendulating. 
What if a few stars are stitched 
To the hem of the garment one cannot throw ofF— 
The sky one cannot look far into? 

and 

I have been a vermilion geyser breaking into petals of hot mist that 
A'eeze to crack, clink ing on the too thin-ringing glass of silence. 

The very spirit of quest and struggle is in this book and 
it is that which makes McAlmon say: 

Wind, wear yourself to stillness, to death — do not listen to the careful 
ones. Do not subside. You inevitably shall be made to, but 
never degrade yourself with ingratiation. 

These are essentials to that spirit which prompted 
Prometheus* theft — the poetic spirit. 

The tedium and the nausea of sophistication, with the 
struggle thereof, are emphasized in this slim book. Yet 
McAlmon is sometimes simple and direct. Witness his 
book of short stories and "momentary" essays — thus he 
calls them — A Hasty Bunch: stories which are plotless, 
unfinished and sketchy, but always honest, always inter- 
esting and often very free; with a dark sullen trend of 
fatalism running through them. What is best in Explora- 

[IS6] 



 



A Spirit of ^uest 

tionSy The Via Dolorosa of Art (a beautiful title!), is a 
rather simple song of the mood that precedes artistic 
conception; indeed it is rather adolescent, taking the word 
not to mean derogation but a rather charming insecure- 
ness and transparency. The same could be said of Mood 
Decisions and Prose Sketches^ which are, like the face of 
the artist of Via Dolorosa^ "sullen with youth," often 
boisterous and sometimes bombastic. In striking con- 
trast these are with some other poems which sound like — 
did you ever hear a vaudeville actor string a lot of high- 
sounding nonsense words? In the Via Dolorosa there is 
perhaps too much nomenclature, and nomenclature means 
a vain effort at conception. McAlmon makes an impres- 
sion. It may be unpleasant — it all depends: a youth, 
agile and attractive, passing by without taking his hat 
off to anybody. Emanuel Camevali 

A PROMISE 

The Golden Darkness, by Oscar Williams. Yale University 
Press. In Gossamer Grey, by Oscar Williams. The 
Bookfellows, Chicago. 

The ghost of tradition no longer walks, insinuating 
repetition; conventionalities of form have been cast aside 
as snares and delusions. Yet anarchy also is being ruled 
out — it has begun to be remembered that discipline is one 
of the duties of the artist, for of what virtue the title 
"artist" if selection and organization are to be left to 

the public? The new generation of poets, studying the 
French symbolists, going to school in technique to William 
Butler Yeats, H. D., and Wallace Stevens; infusing a new 
jflexibility into old forms with Edna Millay — the new 
generation has done with the inchoate. Perfection has 
again become the grail: subtlety is demanded of rhythm 
and rhyme, and profundity of observation. One says 
what one has to say and ends. Above all, no digression 
or elaboration for the sake of the mechanics. 

Oscar Williams, however, is no disciplinarian. His is a 
gift-horse into whose mouth he has not looked. He has 
taken it, been duly grateful, cherished it, and spared it 
heavy burdens. 

Nature, naively as in primitive religions, is his protag- 
onist. She is his lady, and he is her troubadour. In a 
rhythm subtle only by instinct, in facile rhyme, in image 
and execution varying from the painfully beautiful to the 
painfully mediocre, he sings without affectation and in a 
single strain like a bird. The beauties of dawn, of stars, 
of the palpable dusk of twilight, and the palpable darkness 
of night, prick him like needles, urging him to his single- 
noted song, and his gyrations, as of a dancing dervish, 
ever and ever around in the same spot. One is aware, 
however, above all, of an authentic urge, aware that 
Oscar Williams is a poet and no mistake. In spite of an 
endless repetition of grandiloquent abstractions — ^mystery, 
darkness, vastness, strangeness, grandeur, glamour — in 
spite of banal rhythm and rhyme, one realizes that when 


A Promise 

Oscar Williams arrives at the maturity promised by the 
isolated lines quoted below, he will be a far better poet 
than he is now. 

One does not demand great depth of thought of one's 
lyrists. We shall be satisfied if Oscar Williams but plucks 
consistently: 

And far away the poised gray mountains, 
Like billows caught in a trance. 

The tears within the twilight's eyes. 

Fantasy is lithe like a hound. 

And he compares the emergence of the earth at dawn to 
"a clenched fist, knuckled with crags." 

The Golden Darkness {In Gossamer Gray is in eflFect 
supplementary) is a promise and not a fulfilment. The 
young poet has just awakened; he stands before life 
rubbing the mist from his eyes. He has experienced 
little. He has not yet begun to sing of love, that primal 
theme of lyrists. Life hides behind a fog, secretive, 
illusory. When he has done rubbing his eyes, he may 
come into that clarity of vision one demands of good 
creative work, no matter how subjective or how mystical. 
At present he is a novitiate who has taken his first vows. 

Ruminations is perhaps the poem that oflFers most in 
quotation: 

"So," I said, "I am feeling 

What I shall always feel— 
The sharp toe of a stone, 

And a shadow's heel." 

"So," I said, "I am seeing 

What I shall always see — 
The snow blossoms of moonlight 

Blowing on a tree." 

"So," I said, "I am hearing 

What I shall always hear — 
The winds with hair of starlight 

Crying wild and clear." 

"So," I said, "I glory in 

What shall always be mine — 
The flowers flushing red 

In the sky's blue wine." 

"So," I said, "I am living 

What I may not be — 
A dusty masterpiece, 

A mouldy biography." 


SLIGHT SONGS 

Songs from the Journey^ by Wilton Agnew Barrett. Geo. 

H. Doran Co. 

Unfortunately for Mr. Barrett, one feels an almost 
irresistible impulse to review the publisher's blurb upon 
the slip-cover of this volume rather then the relatively 
unimaginative poems which the volume contains. The 
advertising agent who could speak of these frail and some- 
what crudely made vessels for an evident sincerity and 
almost painful earnestness as the "strange songs vibrant 
with passion" of a poet "humanly great, yet clear of 
eye for the little things" (why "yet," we wonder?) 
deserves individual attention. It is a pity that the 

[i6o] 



 



Slight Songs 

blurb is so conspicuously placed as to demand a readings 
since it gives a distorted idea of the poems within. 

These are the work of a poet, seemingly young or 
inexperienced, who sings without much originality of 
how youth intoxicates itself with the sights and sounds 
of the city at dusk or refreshes itself under the country 
pines. Mr. Barrett pauses to pay appropriate tribute to 
Francis Thompson, to A. £. Housman, to Stephen 
Phillips; and his work gives back now and then a faint 
echo of the two last-named poets, and even of Alfred 
Noyes. His verse lacks the smoothness that one expects 
from an admirer of Housman, however. One observes a 
gift for inept metaphor: "a bouquet of young clouds," 
**the scarf of evening sea flows far adown the grassy 
beach," "Trees with fretted stars In their lacy hair"; 
and a disregard for the assonances of English speech, 
which leads him into such phrases as "the love-loveli- 
ness of leaves." Nor has he any great respect for the 
mot juste: here are adjectives of almost inconceivable 
clumsiness — "unbefrenzied laughter"; adjectives long 
since threadbare — "impenetrable, obliterating years"; 
and adjectives that set one's teeth on edge — "his cozy 
spouse." 

Yet in spite of these defects, most of which are due to 
immaturity and are therefore excusable in a first book; 
the poems have the charm of sincerity and of a sympa- 
thetic vision. We feel this particularly in The Valley 
of the ShadoWy That Night I Danced, The House, and A 

[i6i] 




 

Dead Man. Some of his pictures are skilfully constructed, 
even if unmagical; there is vividness in Miriam — a 
white birch in a pine forest — and in his portrayal of 
tanagers in a city square, 

Where toiling Adam stops to watch, 
Tired Eve forgets her apple. 

Mr. Barrett says somewhere "I am looking for stars"; 
and in that voicing of his determined search he has 
revealed his worst trespasses against poetry — self- 
consciousness and straining after e(Fect. Are not stars 
most exquisitely and most beautifully reflected from 
pools of waiting water? Muna Lee 

A JAPANESE COSMOPOLITE 

Seen and Unseen: or Monologues of a Homeless Snail^ 
by Yone Noguchi. (New ed.) Orientalia, New York. 
Selected Poems of Yone Noguchi, selected by himself. 
The Four Seas Co. 

With the publication of Seen and Unseen in 1898, in 
San Francisco, Yone Noguchi came into being, and with 
him came a new tide of oriental influence into our litera- 
ture. Ethical teachings, philosophy of life manufac- 
tured by human intellect, and long narrative stories 
were entirely absent from his poems. He wrote as he 
felt — this is the essence of oriental poetry. While the 
West was busy preaching to the people through its 
poetry, the East discarded intellectual discussions and 


A Japanese Cosmopolite 

devoted itself to creating mood; if philosophy entered 

at all, it was the result of the poet's feeling and not of 

his intellect. Although the poems in Seen and Unseen 

were a little nebulous and undefined, they were the first 

poetry of an oriental expressed in English. 

Reading through selections from Voice of the Valley 

we find this passage, in Song of "Day in Yosemite Valley: 

The shout of hell wedded to the silence of heaven completes the 
valley concert. 

To feel that strange silence of the mountains and the 
sky in the roar of the fall is typically Japanese. To feel 
and create this poetic silence, and through it to suggest 
the roar, the power, and the majesty of the fall without 
describing it, is the mission of Japanese poets. And if 
such a poem is successfully written it has infinitely 
stronger expression, at least to a Japanese, than hun- 
dreds of adjectives piled upon each other by western 
poets. Yone felt this silence, and had he been completely 
a Japanese poet, he would have centered his effort in 
the creation of the silence, instead of in describing the 
sublimity of the fall as he did in the opening of this 
poem: "O thunderous opening of the unseen gate!" 

But this is not a Japanese poem. Yone felt the mood 
of Japanese poetry, and expressed it to a certain degree 
through the western medium. Should western readers 
discover that strange silence in his poetry, his mission 
will be fulfilled. Whether they do or not, time alone 
will tell. The so-called oriental influence in western 

literature today, I am afraid, is taking the form it has 
assumed in the other arts, which, to a great extent, have 
adopted the carcass of Japanese pictures and missed the 
essence. In this respect Tone's Japanese HokkuSy pub- 
lished in 1920, is misleading. For example: 

Speak not Again, Voice; 
The silence washes off sins* 
Come not again. Light. 

This is written in a hokku form, seventeen syllables 
in three lines. But the form does not make a hokku. 
Some of the best hokkus are written without this form. 
Where is that fine and illusive mood, big enough to 
illuminate the infinity of the universe, which is essential 
to the hokku? I cannot find it. This verse may be 
poetic, but perhaps it should have more words, more 
lines, and stronger expression. The hokku is not con- 
densed milk; condensed milk never becomes cream. 
Most of Tone's hokkus sound almost like those of Amy 
Lowell, which miss the essential quality of the type. 
Miss Lowell is of course ignorant of Japanese, but Yone 
has no such excuse. 

• The free verse of today has moved far away from the 
example which Yone set during the nineties; but it owes 
something to him; it acknowledges frankly enough the 
oriental influence. Jun Fujita 




Dante in English Rhyme 

DANTE IN ENGLISH RHYME 

The Divine Comedy of Dante Alighieri (line for line trans- 

Iation)> by Melville Best Anderson. World Book Co., 

New York. 

No translation of The Divine Comedy can be altogether 
acceptable unless in rhyme. Prose, however faithful, is 
wholly inadequate; blank verse, however skilful, is not 
much better. And the rhyme ought to be (titanic achieve- 
ment!) the terza rima of the original — that endless chain 
which imposes poetry upon those pedestrian passages 
that occur even in Dante. 

Furthermore, no version of the Comedy^ not even the 
original, is fully intelligible and effective without notes. 
These need not be detdled, nor need they busy themselves 
over minor points; but they must be present for the sake 
of a broad and general guidance through the intricacies 
of Dante's great conception and the labyrinth of an 
erudition which drew upon all the learning of the time. 
And if these notes be marginal, rather than at the bottom 
of the page or at the end of the volume, their usefulness 
is increased threefold. 

These requirements are met in the newest translation 
of the Comedy — that of Dr. Melville B. Anderson, now 
presented after twenty years of labor. This translation 
is in the triple rhyme of the original, and is practically 
line for line. Dr. Anderson has favored the strong, 
simple, direct words of our English speech, with scant 
dependence upon Latinized "limbs and outward flour- 

ishes." Though the employment of terza rima was 
discouraged by such a Dante scholar as Charles Eliot 
Norton, its use here may be pronounced highly successful. 
The rhyme-scheme is maintained with considerable 
taste and skill throughout, and many lines equal the 
concision and impressiveness of the original ones, with 
no loss of poetic quality. 

The nub of the Comedy is the thirtieth canto of the 
Purgatorioy with the appearance of Beatrice in the car; 
and the climax of the work is the Beatific Vision, in the 
last canto of the Paradiso. Brief excerpts will show 
Dr. Anderson's treatment of these crucial passages. 

"Blessed be thou that comestl" cried that band, 
Filling the air with flowers along the way; 
"O give ye lilies all with liberal hand!"— 

is assuredly a satisfactory equivalent for — 

Tutti dicean: "Benedictus qui vents** 
e fior gittando di sopra e dintomo: 
"Manibus o date lilia pienis!" — 

and is none the worse for being in one language. 

With Hallelujah on requickened tongue 
is a noble equivalent for — 

la rivestita voce alleluiando; 

and 

Angels and ministers of life eteme 

stands effectively for — 

ministri e messaggier di vita eterna, 

[i66] 



 



Dante in English Rhyme 

unless a stress, perhaps undue, be laid on the fact that 
"ministers," scripturally, form but one of the general 
order of "angels." 

In the Beatific Vision of the Trinity, the translator 
employs hendacasyllables — speaking roughly, our so-called 
"weak ending." This is of course in high conformity 
with the scheme of the original — I believe there are but 
six ten-syllable lines in the entire Comedy: 

To me within the luminous deep being 

Of Lofty Light appeared three circles, showing 
Three Colors, and in magnitude agreeing; 

And from the First appeared the Second flowing 
Like Iris out of Iris, and the Third 
Seemed fire that equally from both is glowing. 

Truly, in English, the eleven-syllable line leans heavily 
on the present participle. 

Immediately afterward comes a passage in which the 
line-for-line principle is set aside. 

O luce eterna, che sola in te sidi, 
sola t'intendi, e da te intelletta 
ed intendente te ami e arridi! 

becomes: 

O Light Eterne, who dost thyself include, 
Who lovest, smiling at thy own intents. 
Self-understanding and self-understood! — 

a departure which is more than justified by the splendid 
success of the concluding line. 

The notes, as I have indicated, are placed where they 
do the most service; and they often have a touch of un- 

conventionality and informality which makes them not 
only serviceable but enjoyable. For minor detailed 
points the translator refers us, properly enough, to well- 
known and easily accessible handbooks. 

In make-up the volume b handsome and intelligent. 
Cover, jacket, and the few illustrations are highly apropos. 
However, the number of the canto might have shown in 
the running heads; and it would have done no harm if 
the lines themselves had been numbered by the usual 
threes or fives. 

On the whole, a great achievement. Possessing 
Scartazzini in Italian and Anderson in English, one is 
well equipped; indeed, other editions and versions might 
even be cUspensed with, Henry B. Fuller 



CORRESPONDENCE 

A WORD FROM MR. UNTERMEYER 

To the Editor: The few of us who have been worried 
about the sometimes monotonous heresies of Poetry's 
younger critics are grateful for the catholicity exhibited 
in your May number. The magazine threatens to become 
what it used to be: an adventure in excitement. Where 
else in one journal, I wonder, could one hope to find so 
scornful an attack on feminist poetry as Yvor Winters' 
querulous review of Anna Wickham's book, and so 

[i68] 



 



A Word from Mr. Untermeyer 

incongruous a defense of the jingle of chronic optimism 

as Gamaliel Bradford's laudation of "Eddie" Guest? 

Because of a personal thrust in the first review, I am 

appending an expostulation to these congratulatory 

sentences. Thus Mr. Winters, banning his review of 

The Contemplative ^arry: 

"The most casual reading — if such a thing were possible — of Mrs. 
Wickham's work reveals die strength of her candor, the intiense single- 
ness of her purpose," writes Mr. Untermeyer in an introduction that 
makes one admire the shrewdness of the gentlemen who chose him for 
his task. And, without wishing to disagree, the hesitant reader may be 
permitted to wonder what candor and purpose may have to do with art. 

The spectacle of an author championing his publishers 
is so rare that I take a double pleasure in asking Mr. 
A^nters, as courteously as possible, what secret agents 
led him to believe that Harcourt, Brace and Co. "chose" 
me to introduce Mrs. Wickham to the American public? 
The truth is exactly the opposite; for better or for worse, 
I "chose" them. For many years an enthusiastic reader 
of Mrs. Wickham's work as it appeared in England, I 
suggested and prepared a condensed edition of two of 
her books, offering, brashly and with malice prepense, 
to supply an appreciatory foreword which I had written 
for The New Republic. Mr! Winters, in all fairness, 
should attribute to the "gentlemen" who publish no 
more "shrewdness" than they actually possess. 

But my chief quarrel with your reviewer is based on 
his second sentence. Mr. Winters is a poet, and he is 
sensitive enough to know that art, like beauty, is not a 

thing but a relation. And yet he writes about it as 
dogmatically as though he were using a sacrosanct 
capital A, as if art were a static property or a fixed form 
which one could violate as easily as breaking a vase or 
dropping the fourteenth line of the sonnet. The term 
itself tends increasingly to such confused thought and 
cloudy writing that I would like to see an insurgent 
movement which had for one of its objects the elimina- 
tion from the language of certain words. I refer partic- 
ularly to the tag-ends of literary jargon which have be- 
become as full of contradictions and as empty of meaning 
as: Arty Beauty ^ Magic ^ Rhetoric ^ Design ^ Lyric ^ etc. Mr. 
Winters should remember, what he undoubtedly knows, 
that the desire to write definitely of definite things (if 
Mr. CabeU will pardon the realistic paraphrase) is as 
much a prbvince of "art" as the most subtle interweaving 
of nuance and overtone. And for such creation, " candor " 
and "purpose" are not wholly negligible. 

Louis Untermeyer 

Noie by the Editor: It is hardly necessary to remind Mr. Untermeyer 
that the editors are not responsible for opinions printed in our cor- 
respondence section. That is partly a protest department, and even 
Mr. Guest may find a defender there. 

Reviews are a different matter. If the editor were to permit only 
her own exact opinions to be expressed in reviews, she would needs 
write them all herself. In a general way she endeavors to print reviews 
which agree, on the whole, with the feeling and attitude toward the art 
which the magazine seeks to encourage. The reviewer's ardor may 
sometimes carry him too far, but to insist on meticulous modifications 
might destroy all ardor. 


Robert Bums Wilson 

ROBERT BURNS WILSON 

To the Editor: Many of my friends and myself were 
interested in the editorial in your southern number en- 
titled Poetry South. The treatment of southern literature 
seemed to center chiefly about the southeastern states, 
but as passing mention was made of certain Kentuckians, 
we wish to call your attention to the omission of the name 
of the poet-painter, Robert Burns Wilson. 

To any Kentuckian, it is almost anathema that our 
greatly beloved and distinguished poet should be missed 
from any discussion of southern letters; and I venture 
to say that in the coming revival of interest in southern 
literature, his name will be prominent. The contem- 
porary and friend of Madison Cawein, James Lane Allen, 
Henry Watterson, James Whitcomb Reilly, Richard 
Watson Gilder and a host of other American men of 
letters, there is hardly an event in the literary history of 
his time with which he was not connected. Few Americans 
who went through the Spanish-American War can forget 
his Remember the Mainey and To a Kentucky Cardinal the 
children of the South learn in their readers. In 1909 he 
received the Memorial Medal for his commemorative poem 
at the Poe Centenary held at the University of Virginia 
(his home state — he migrated to Kentucky); and his 
tribute to Robert £. Lee is immortal. In the cemetery 
at Frankfort his monument stands side by side with 
Daniel Boone's, overlooking the Elkhorne River, and his 
bust is in the State House. 

Wilson's name was familiar in the magazines and he 
left three books of verse: Life and Love^ The Shadows 
of the Trees and The Chant of a Woodland Spirit. Another 
book is to be published shortly. His daughter has once 
contributed to your magazine, I believe; her name b 
Anne Elizabeth Wilson. A Kentuckian 

NOTES 

Ceruin problems of editorial poliqr may perhaps be oonfided to our 
contributors and readers. Of late we have been informed of cases of 
disappointment and irritation due to our hdding accepted poems too 
long before publication. 

This impatience is hardly to be wondered at, but these poets might 
be still more disappointed if we should refuse their poems merely because 
we have no immediate room for them. The greatest editorial difficulty 
we encounter is the temptation to accept more poems than we are able 
to publish promptly. It seems an injustice to send back a good poem, 
but delay is the only possible alternative. We cannot enlarge the 
magazine, as each copy printed, being partly paid for by endowment, 
already costs more than its retail price; moreover, a monthly sheaf of 
verse should be discreedy small. 

Apparently there is but one thing to do — we must be less hospitable. 
The editors will be compelled hereafter to draw a more stringent line 
in the acceptance of poems. We have too much advance material on 
hand, but the' conquest of soft moods may enable us to begin our next 
volume in October with a cleaner slate. Hereafter we must try to keep 
the edge of resolution sharp, even at the risk of errors of exclusion. 

We deeply regret to announce the recent death, in Portland, Oregon, 
of Joseph Andrew Galahad, whose poem, ^ Mood^ appears in this 
number. 

For years this poet has fought gallantly his deadly enemy — tubercu- 
losis. In his last letter to the editor, written February 17th, he said: 

"Vm much better, and the old dragon has run away for a whole year, 


Notes 

the doctors tell me. Vm going to believe them this trip, and work as 
no one ever dreamed of working for that year." 

His was a heroic spirit, and his death means the loss of a friend whose 
letters were as warm and personal as a hand-clasp. His poems reflected 
the spirit of the man; one of the best of them, Argosy y which was first 
printed in the North American Review^ presented allegorically his own 
struggle for life and beauty. 

Of the poets represented this month, eight have appeared before in 
Poetry. These are, besides Mr. Galahad, Mr. Isidor Schneider and 
Mr. Raymond Holden, of New York; Miss Elizabeth Coatsworth, of 
Pasadena and many other places from China to Buffalo; Kathryn 
White Ryan (Mrs. Edward R.), of New York; Miss Mary Carolyn 
Da vies, author of Youth Riding and other books (MacmiUan Co.), 
whose present New York address will be gratefully received; Mr. David 
Morton, author of Ships in Harbor (G. P. Putnam's Sons); and Mr. John 
McClure, author of Airs and Ballads (Alfred A. KnopO- 

The others are new to our readers: 

Mr. Osbert Sitwell, author of Argonaut and Juggemauty is a well 
known young English poet, one of "the three Sitwells" — sister and two 
brothers^— who were first published by B. H. Blackwell, of Oxford, a few 
years ago. 

Mr. Alva N. Turner, who first appeared in Dr. Williams' mimeo- 
graphed magazine Contaet^ is now living in Mendota, Wis. Mr. Mere- 
dith Beyers lives mostly in Chicago; and Helen Russmann (Mrs. Felix 
R.) in one of its suburbs, Palos Park. Miss Athena McFadden, of 
Granville, N. Y., is finbhing her course at Smith College. 

Mr. Robert J. Roe, now living in Hohokus, N. J., "worked as line- 
man, factory hand, sailor and newspaper hack" before he was twenty, 
went to the Mexican border with New Jersey militia in 191 6, and the 
next year took up a claim in Arizona. Mr. Roe writes: 

" 4 Sailor's NoU-hook b an attempt to interpret the sailor in terms of 
his own choosing. 

"Michaelis Kerek was my shipmate on a four-masted schooner for a 
nine-months' trip in the South Pacific. He is Lettish by birth, but by 
profession he is an alien, a wandering man, at home everywhere and 
nowhere at ease; in short, a sailor. 

"He is unlettered but not uncultured. His poems were spoken to 
me without his understanding what they were, and without my realiza- 
tion at the time. They were pitched in a key that the sea knows, 
whispered to me at night in the lantern-lighted forecastle; confided to 
me on the forecastle head when I came to relieve him and he lingered 
a moment, loath to quit the comfort of a seat on the anchor windlass, 
the mysterious peace of the hushed water under the forefoot, and the 
aching lunge of the jib-boom at the stars. I set down what he told me 
in my journal, and months after my return, on rereading his phrases, I 
said to myself. This is the stuff of which poetry is made.* And I 
set myself to interpret it. 

"I may not have done justice to Michaelis. Surely, if you do not 
get the impression of a wistful soul longing beyond the possibilities of 
his intelligence (which is what we all are doing) I shall have failed; but 
at least I shall have the satisfaction of knowing that I have done my 
utmost." 

BOOKS RECEIVED 

ORIGINAL verse: 

Odes and Lyrics^ by Hartley Burr Alexander. Marshall Jones Co. 
Real Property^ by Harold Monro. Poetry Bookshop, London. 
Melodies and Mountains ^ by Isabella McLennan McMeekin. Stratford Co. 
The Serpent's Heady by Ruth Young. Basil Blackwell, Oxford, Eng. 
Iron Monger, by S. A. De Witt. Frank Shay, New York. 
Down-adown Deny, by Walter de la Mare. Henry Holt & Co. 
Songs at Anchor, by B. L. Shurtleff. Plimpton Press. 
Songs of a Dream, by Alfred James Fritchy. Privately printed, Los 

Angeles. 
Introducing Irony, by Maxwell Bodenheim, Boni & Liveright. 
Dreams and a Sword, by Medora C. Addison. Yale Univ. Press. 

anthologies: 
The Little Book of Society Verse, ed. by Claude M. Fuess and Harold C. 

Stearns. Houghton Mifflin Co. 
Home-work and Hobbyhorses (Perce Playbook VI), ed. by H. Caldwell 

Cook. E. P. Dutton & Co. 

prose: 
For What do we Uvef, by Edward Howard Griggs. Orchard Hill Press, 
Croton-on-the-Hudson. 


Writers of Verse 

will be interested in a studio of Creative 
Writing conducted at Bread Loaf Inn in 
the Green Mountains by Middlebury 
College in connection with its unique 
School of English. 



JULY S— AUGUST 18, 19«2 



EDWARD D. COLLINS, Director 
FOURTEENTH SUMMER SESSION 

MIDDLEBURY, VERMONT 

MISS HARRIET MONROE 

who has studied the poetry movement 
in all its phases, will consider engage- 
ments for lectvires, and readings of 
modem poetry, dviring the autumn 
and winter of 1922-1923. 

For terms, dates and other details 
please address 

POETRY 

232 East Erie street, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 



 



We Are Backing the Poets— hb*^ 

utouj — > Are You Backing Us? 

For a verse-writer to be printed in POETRY is about the 

most honorable of recognitions. 

Fird Madix Huifftr in thi New Y§rk 
Evening Post Literary Review. 

This monthly publication is an exhibition of literary faith 
and bravery that belong to the heroic age. 

The Daily Journal, East St. Lmis. 

The varied interest and beauty presented are typical of 
POETRY'S quality. Thanks to a rare coincidence of 
poise and generous imagination, of sense and sensitiveness, 
it ranks easily as the best vehicle of poetry in the English 
language. 

Fr§m an iditorial in thi New Y§rk Sunday Tribune. 

POETRY has become a significant force 
in the intellectual life of America. That 
astute observer, the late William Marion 
Reedy, wrote: 'Trobably Miss Monroe has 
done more for the high art of song than any 
other person in the United States'' — a state- 
ment which has been generously supported 
by other commentators of similar prestige. 

POETRY: A Magazine of Verse 
232 E. Erie St., Chicago 

Enclosed find $3.00 (Canada, $3.15; foreign, $^.25) 
for one year's subscription to POETRY. 

Beginning 

Name 

Address . 



 



Special Offer to Subscribers 

For an Even FOUR DOLLARS 

sent for a new subscription or a renewal, you may have 

POETRY for one year (price ^3.00), and 
THE NEW POETRY— An Anthology 

(Macmillan Co. — $2.2§ postpaid), a representative col- 
lection of contemporary verse, selected by the editors of 
this magazine. The latest edition contains a revised, up- 
to-date bibliography. 

"For the envisioniiig of the range of the 'new poetry,' and a com- 
parison of its diversities, there is no other collection that compares 
with this anthology.*' — RgvifW qf Reviiws, 

''The introduction of this anthology gives a most enlightening dis- 
cussion of the development and tendencies of the so-called ' new poetry.' " 
— From ihi cUusifiid list qf contemporary poets compiled by Anne Morris 
Boyd^ A, jB., B, Lh S., Instructor in the Unioersity of Illinois Library 
School. 

A university professor rf English^ one oj many whose classes use THE 
NEW POETRY as a textbook, writes: 

"It u quite the thing I have been looking for this many a day." 

Or, add ^2.25 to the retail price of any book of con- 
temporary verse on the lists of the following publishers: — 
The Macmillan Co., Henry Holt & Co., Mitchell 
Kennerley, Geo. H. Doran Co., John Lane Co., The 
Century Co., G. P. Putnam's Sons, Richard G. 
Badger, Sherman French & Co. and The Four Seas 
Co. 

You will get the book postpaid and a year's subscrip- 
tion to the magazine. 

Send your order at once to 
POETRY - - - 232 East Erie Street, Chicago 



 



AT HOME AND FOUNTAIN 

BE SURE IT IS 

"HorlickV 

The Original 
Malted Milk 

The Food-drink For All Age* 

REFRESHES INVIGORATES 

FINEST QUALITY 



BOUND VOLUMES 
of POETRY 

G)mplete volumes of POETRY bound in buckram with 

Index and Title Page 
Vol. 1-October» 1912 {Rf print) to March, 1913.... 92.75 
All Other Volumes, II-XIX, each 2.00 

The bound volumes of POETRY make a weU-nigh com- 
plete collection of the best verse written in English since 
October, 1912. No library should be without them. 

Binder/ frices having advanced to more than twice what we originally 
paidf the above ofer is scarcely higher than actual cost to us. Therefore it 
does not include postage or exfressage^ which will be extra. Each volume 
wrapped, weighs 1}4 pounds. 

Subscribers may have tkar $'wm c$pies vf PoiTRT bvuud fvr the 
exact c$st acc$rdihg U the binder's bill {Si^So vr m$re fvr special 
$rders). Or, if they return t$ us c$pies in perfect cvnditivn, ^ve 
*will send neiu v$lumes fvr Si, 60 each, 

POETRY - - 232 E. ERIE STREET 



 




Vol XX 



No. IV 




A Magazine of Verse 
Edited by Harriiet Monroe 

July 1922 



Pianissimo (A Dialog^ne) 

by Alfred Kreymborg 

King Alfred and the 
Peasant Woman 

by Anna Wickham 

In Russia, by Lola Ridge 



232 East Erie Street, Chicago 
$3.00 per Year Sintfle Numbers 25c 




 



How I with that loiiie BngUsh paper had anything like the authentic vitality of 
POBTRTt Louit GOdimt 



Vol. XX No. IV 

POETRY/or JULY, 1922 



PAGE 

I^anisnmo Affred Kreymborg 175 

In the Dark City , John Hall Wheelock 187 

Notes of Travel Harriet Monroe 188 

On the Train I-III— At O'Neill's Point—In the Yellowstone— 
Utah— In High Places 

The White Moth — ^The Gentle Housewife . Rosamond LangMdge 194 

Full of LAUghter Louis Golding 196 

Syncrasy A.A.Rosenthal 197 

King Alfred and the Peasant Woman — ^A Poet Advises a Change 

of Clothes Anna fFickham 198 

Prediction Morris Gilbert 200 

In Russia Lola Ridge 201 

The Spilling of the Wine — ^Snow Dance for the Dead — 
The White Bird 

Shelley H.M. 206 

A New Pulitzer Prize F.Af. 215 

Reviews: 

Carlos Williams* New Book Yvor fVinters 216 


Tarnished Gold Agnes Lee Freer 223 

Slavic Poetry Isidor Schneider 228 

Notes and Books Received 233, 234 



Manmcripta miiit be accompanied by a stamped and tdf-addrcfied envelope. 

Indadve yearly nibecription rates. In the United States, Medoo, Cuba and 
American poeeeiiioni, |3.00 net; in Canada. |3.15 net; in all other coontifet In the 
Foetal Union. |3.25 net. Entered ae aecond-daM matter Nov. 15, 1912, at the 
post-oflioe, at Chlcafo, IlL, under Act of March 3, 1879. 



Published monthly at 232 East Erie St.> Chicago, 111. 
Copyri^ 1922, by BttrrM M<mro$. AB ri^hit rtuntd. 




Boefay 

A Magazine of \^ne 



JULY 1922 



PIANISSIMO 

An Intef7nc2zo 

For Bee KnuJsen 

^ # fFO elderly gentlemeity in clothes even older than them- 
-^ selveSy are just sitting down — with the outward aid of 
crooked canes and the inward support of sighs — on what is 
presumably a park bench^ shaded by mountain laurels y with 
a swan-pond for a background. The men also carry the 
venerable pipes of tradition: in this case, heavily crusted 
corn-cobs. Their speech, very slow and gentle, gives them the 
sound of impersonal instruments improvising a harmless duo: 
prosaic music blown into the air at the end of smoke spirals, 
the re-lighting of pipes necessarily frequent. The only 
apparent difference between them, traceable perhaps to the 
unconscious bias of habitual meditation and perpetual com-- 
parison of ideas, has reduced itself to a slight wagging of the 
head on the part of the one as opposed to a slight nodding on 

the part of the other. Speech and movement coincide almost 
as caressingly as the effect produced by lips brushing wood- 
instruments. 

Henry: Nay, but I insist 

that the quick sharp touches the rain 

and slower titillation the sun 

put upon those flowers we saw 

have in them the same heedless passion, 

heedless of all save the self, 

which envelops unconscious adolescence. 

That isn't the type of caress I'm seeking. 
Hodge: Those flowers were pale indeed 

with a suggestion of pink and beginning of blue! 
Henry: Early degrees of coloration 

solely indicative of the mood 

of self-interest of rain and of sun; 

alternately shaping something, 

like a left hand and right 

of one and the same conjurer 

reproducing his own vague image: 

the flower somehow a captive, 

clay just as we are, 

subject to the next modulation 

towards the next helpless state of being. 

I've had my share and enough 

of such no longer magical passes. 
Hodge: Nearer to red and closer to purple! 


 






Alfred Kreymborg 



Henry: That is the type of caress 

which has made of what I was 

the droning instrument I am, 

played upon in the one tonality 

of a careless self-love so long 

that the grave itself 

will simply be the final effort 

of the same somebody using me 

to express himself in a minor cadence — 

his little alas but a sigh 

that his composition closed so shabbily. 
Hodge: And still you cannot recall, 

stubborn lad that you are, 

a single variation, a dissonance, a brftve? 
Henry: Neither can you, Hodge, 

with your eye pointing forward! 
Hodge: Let us try just once more agsdn — 
Henry: Folk-song of the hopeful! — 
Hodge: And perhaps — 
Henry: Da capo of the hopeless! 
Hodge: Possibly the shade of this laurel, 

itself the design of accident, 

angle of sun and of tree 

meeting, rounding, spreading, 

will quiet your melancholy, 

and some quaint caress have room to stir, 

your memory mislaid? 
Henry: Memory is a cupboard 

[177I 




 

I have gone to myriad times 

and have returned the one time always 

with relics so tedious 

I find them heavier than boulders. 

Since you who persist must try once again, 

pray, take down the future if you can. 
Hodge: Let us then sit here and wait, 

and the strange, the new, may yet transpire. 
Henry: You nod your head and I wag mine, 

that is the difference between us: 

you have verticals left in you, 

I am all horizontal. 
Hodge: But we fire breathed into moving 

in accordance with the odd, 

delicately reciprocal nuance 

of our one and the same — 
Henry: Bassoonist! — 
Hodge: You dub him lugubriously! — 
Henry: Accurately! — 
Hodge: Henry! 

[Henry looks at Hodge. Hodge smiles. They smoke in 
silence. Hodge points with his pipe-stem.] 
Hodge: That swan, 

a white interrogation 

embracing the water, 

and being embraced in response — 
Henry: Their eyes reflecting each other, 

their bodies displacing — 


Alfred Kreymhcrg 

Hodge: That swallow cleaving the 8ur, 

trusting his wings to the waves of ether — 
Henry: And the wr trusting him 

with room in her body, 

relinquishing just enough space 

for him to fit himself into — 
Hodge: Or the worm underground, 

digging cylinder channels — 
Henry: And the earth undulating 

to the pressure of excavation — 
Hodge: Caresses like these, simple Henry — 
Henry: Caresses like those, simpler Hodge, 

have been clapped in my ear 

by your credulous tongue 

with such affectionate fortitude, 

Tm a bell attacked by echoes 

each time the sea moves. 

[Hodge looks at Henry and wags Us head. Henry nods, 
and smiles. Hodge turns away.] 

Henry: You also remind me of evergreens 

refusing to acknowledge the seasons, 
or unable to distinguish 
between white flowers and snow. 
You're as old and as young as romance. 

Hodge: It's you who fall redundant, 
you who fondle the rondo — 
why not have done and call me senile? 

[179I 




 

Henry: Senility is a sling 

invented by cynical youths 
who envy and would rob 
the old of their possessions. 

Hodge: You admit possessions? — 
you contradict yourself? — 

Henry: My property 

comprises the realization, 

stripped bare of hope or hypothesis, 

that I own neither things nor persons; 

least of all these, myself. 

Nor am I longer deluded 

with even the thought of touching 

a body that pirate youth would filch, 

who cannot rid his blood of desire. 

Hodge: Then you must be that youth, 
since you crave — 

Henry: A type of caress? 

Hodge: How do you wriggle out of that? 

[Hodge and Henry relight their pipes.] 

Henry: The type of caress I crave 
must have in it 
no desire to make of me 
aught of what it would make of itself. 
It must not say to me, 
"I would make of you 
more of me and less of you — " 

[i8o] 



 



Alfred Kreymborg 



Hodge: Nor must it lure me^ 

by virtue of the bounty 

of its body or the beauty 

of its mind, to sigh, 

^^I would make of myself 

more of you and less of me — ** 
Henry: I have had enough 

of such juxtaposition — 
Hodge: The immortal dialogue 

of life and of death — 
Henry: The recurrent symbol 

of being and reflection — 
Hodge: Of Narcissus 

in love with himself— 
Henry: Of God chanting a solo 

to comfort His loneliness, 

like an aged woman 

knitting things for her children to wear 

in her own image, 

singing: "This is I, 

and you are mine; 

so wear my love as I love you." 

[Pause. Henry lowers his head; so does Hodge.] 

Henry: If it is 

God who fashioned me, 

is it He 

who asks, is He pleased? 

Hodge: Does my prayer, 

which is His 

ifFmHis, 

move or leave Him unmoved? 
Henry: It is He 

who lifts these questions, 

or am I 

to blame for thinking? 
Hodge: If He, 

noticing me 

at last, notices Himself— 

what's wrong with Him? 
Henry: Really, 

Fm not r^etting 

what I am, 

nor be^ng, make me better. 
Hodge: If I 

have a sense of the droll, 

surely 

He has one too. 
Henry: Asking Himself 

to pray to Himself— 

that is, 

if He fashioned me? 

[Pause.] 

Hodge: Does it comfort you? 
Henry: A little — for a moment. 


Alfred Kreymborg 

Hodge: Farther than last time? 
Henry: A tiny stretch beyond. 

[They raise their heads.] 

Hodge: It*s still a wee mad melody — 
Henry: Innocent blasphemy 

of the inner 

frantic to grow to the outer, 

to the more than itself — 

the molecule a star, 

the instant universal — 

the me a trifle closer 

to the you that gave it life. 
Hodge: You recall how you composed it 

years before we came to this? 
Henry: As clearly as a brook, 

and you sitting in its midst 

like a pebble nodding assent 

to the foolish reckless sound — 
Hodge: Strange that we return to it! 
Henry: Stranger still, we do naught but return! 

[They continue smoking j Htnry wagging, Hodge nodding.] 

Hodge: Did you feel something stir? 
Henry: Only another breeze — 
Hodge: But didn't you see that cloud alter? — 
Henry: The cause of the breeze — 

Hodge: Caressing us? — 

Henry: Leaving me colder — 

Hodge: Me warmer. 

Henry: When the temperature in a room 

is higher or lower than normal, 

it is needful to open 

or to shut a window — 
Hodge: Which? 
Henry: A west wind 

urges me to shut a west window, 

an east an east — that is all. 

And I have known the same touch 

to thrill and leave me cold, 

and this monotonous heart of mine 

to open and close in childish acquiescence 
Hodge: Button your coat about you — 
Henry: We have no business 

gadding around in the spring — 

it was you who suggested it, 

you with your nodding. 
Hodge: It was the look of the world outdoors — 

let us try another place, 

or wander back home again. 
Henry: And try just once more? 
Hodge: Perhaps, providing — 
Henry: We are like twin philosophers, 

phrase-practitioners 

who argue with slender 


Alfred Kreymborg 

tapering sensitive beards 

which each lays persuasive hold of, 

pulling first the one the other 

and the other the one in turn, 

till their heads collide and rebound 

back to the starting-point, 

with if or suppose or providing or but — 
Hodge: But you have more msdom? — 
Henry: And you more happiness! 

And thus the moon pursues the sun! 

[Hodge touches Henry. \ 

Hodge: Are you angry? 
Henry: Angry with you? 

[They eye each other^ smile faintly y and turn away,] 

Henry: Your talk comes to me from afar, 

though you are only an elbow away; 

like rain making an arid soil 

intimate with better things. 

They, perhaps, are what are left me. 
Hodge: If I say, I love thee, 

in some guise or other — 

this is more than talk? 
Henry: The gesture of a lonely spirit 

reaching out to a lonelier. 

[They methodically shake out their pipes and stuff them 

away, Hodge nudges Henry ever so gently. Henry tries to 
rise. Hodge has to aid him. They move away haltingly^ 
Hodge* s stick tapping a little in advance of Henry* Sy and 
Hodge* s arm through Henry's. Henry tries to shake off 
Hodge y but the latter persists. They move slightly faster^ 

Henry: Was it yesterday I said — 
Hodge: What, Henry? 
Henry: I love thee? 
Hodge: In actual words, nay — 

but the day before — 
Henry: Then let them have been said 

yesterday as well, 

for if words ever fail me — 
Hodge: They never fail you. 
Henry: Nor you, Hodge. 

[They nod together.] 

Henry: Let us go silently 

the next pace or two — 
Hodge: As you will — 
Henry: And let other things speak — 
Hodge: For us? 
Henry: For themselves. 

[They disappeoTy Hodge* s stick still sounding in advance 
of Henry* s\ 

Alfred Kreymhorg 

[i86] 



 



IN THE DARK CITY 

There is a harper plays 

Through the long watches of the lonely night 

When, like a cemetery, 

Sleepathe dark city, with her millions laid each in his tomb. 

I feel it in my dream; but when I wake. 

Suddenly, like some secret thing not to be overheard. 

It ceases — 

And the gray night grows dumb. 

Only in memory 
Linger those veiled adagios, fading, fading • • . 
Till, with the morning, they are lost. 

What door was opened then? 

What worlds undreamed of lie around us in our sleep. 

That yet we may not know? 

Where is it one sat playing 

Over and over, with such high and dreadful peace. 

The passion and sorrow of the eternal doom? 

John Hall Wheelock 


NOTES OF TRAVEL 



ON THE TRAIN 



The lady in front of me in the car, 

WixHi little red coils close over her ears, 

Is talking witli her friend; 

And the circle of ostrich foam around her hat. 

Curving over like a wave. 

Trembles with her little windy words. 

What is she saying, I wonder, 

That her feathers should tremble 

And the soft far of her coat should slip down over her 

shoulders? 
Has her string of pearls been stolen. 
Or maybe her husband? 

II 

He is drunk, that man — 

Drunk as a lord, a lord of the bibulous past. 

He shouts wittily from his end of the car to the man in the 

comer; 
He bows to me with chivalrous apologies. 
He philosophizes, plays with the wisdom of the ages. 
Flings off his rags. 
Displays his naked soul — 
Athletic, beautifal, grotesque. 


Harriet Monroe 



In the good time coming. 

When men drink no more, 

Shall we never see a nude soul dancing 

Stript and free 

In the temple of his god? 

Ill 

She comes smiling into the car 

With iridescent bubbles of children. 

She blooms in the close plush seats 

Like a narcissus in a bowl of stones. 

She croons to a baby in her lap — 

The trees come swinging by to listen. 

And the electric lights in the ceiling are stars. 



AT O NEILL S POINT 

Grand Canyon of Arizona 

Cardeflas, I salute you! 

You, marauding buccaneering Spaniard! 

You, ragged and sworded lordling, slashing through to the 

Seven Cities of Cibola; 
You, athirst in the desert, seeking to drink from the great 

river — 
The mother of western seas, dear to your Hopi guides! 
You, Cardeflas the Spaniard, three centuries before the 

next first white man, 

You with your handful of starvelings stood on this Rim 

of the Canyon, 
And looked down at flecks of water in the deeps, 
Like yellow petals fallen. 
You scrambled a few hundred feet down the sheer rock 

wall, 
And knew you would never drink of that tawny torrent. 
You gave it up, and thirsted, and cursed your guides. 

And your leader, Coronado the adventurer. 
Thought you mad when you told your story — 
Mad of thirst in the desert. 
Dreaming of loud deep rivers 
In demon-haunted caverns. 

But I believe you. 

Here where I stand you stood — 

On the rim of the world. 

You saw these sky-wrapt towers. 

These terraced purple temples august and terrible. 

And over them — over — 

You gazed at the Celestial City, 

And counted the steps of gods on its ramparts. 

And saw the Great White Throne, all pearl and moonstone. 

Beyond, through the turquoise gates. 




Harriet Monroe 



IN THE YELLOWSTONE 



Little pin-prick geysers, spitting and sputtering; 

Little foaming geysers, that spatter and cough; 

Bubbling geysers, that gurgle out of the calyx of morning- 
glory pools; 
'Laughing geysers, that dance in the sun, and spread their 
robes like lace over the rocks; 

Raging geysers, that rush out of hell with a great noise, 
and blurt out vast dragon-gulps of steam, and, 
finishing, sink back wearily into darkness; 

Glad geysers, nymphs of the sun, that rise, slim and nude, 
out of the hot dark earth, and stand poised in 
beauty a moment, veiling their brows and breasts 
in mist; 

Winged geysers, spirits of fire, that rise tall and straight 
like a sequoia, and plume the sky with foam: 

O wild choral fountains, forever singing and seething, 
forever boiling in deep places and leaping forth for 
bright moments into the air. 

How do you like it up here? Why must you go back to 
the spirits of darkness? What do you tell them 
down there about your little glorious life in the sun? 



UTAH 



It was a queer country your harsh Lord gave you. 
Great Brigham, whom I see coated and curled 

In bronze before me in the public square! 

It was a scraped and shining skeleton, 

Gnawed to the bone long since at God's first breakfast 

And thrown away to bleach out in the sun. 

Yet here He led you — 

The Lord and his vicegerent Joseph Smith — 

He ordered you 

To take the dead earth from His niggard hand 

And set His Throne up by the salty sea — 

The little bucketful of ocean, poured 

Over the desert's feet between the hills. 

And so you starved and prayed, 

Thirsted and starved and prayed through the lean years, 

Keeping the faith, digging your little ditches. 

Making the desert blossom as the rose. 

You married many wives. 

And got you many children to fulfil 

The special order whispered in the night 

To His apostle by the Lord Himself— 

The God of Abraham, of Saul and David, 

Of Solomon and other lustful kings. 

And here, tithe upon tithe, stone upon stone. 
Your saints built up His throne unto the Lord 
From plans the angel taught your hand to draw: 
His new Solomon's Temple, heaven-remembered. 
To rise again here at the western gate. 
And prove His glory in these latter days! 


Harriet Monroe 



Great Brighaniy sleeping now under the desert 
With all your wives. 

What summary vengeance have you meted out 
To that ironic angel? 

He alone builds 
Who builds for beauty ^ shrining his little truth 
In stones that make it fair. 



IN HIGH PLACES 

My mountains, God has company in heaven — 

Crowned saints who sing to him the sun-long day. 

He has no need of speech with you — with you, 

Dust of his foot-stool! No, but I have need. 

Oh, speak to me, for you are mine as well — 

Drift of my soul. I built you long ago; 

I reared your granite masonry to make 

My house of peace, and spread your flowered carpets. 

And set your blue-tiled roof, and in your courts 

Made musical fountains play. Ah, give me now 

Shelter and sustenance and liberty. 

That I may mount your sky-assailing towers 

And hear the winds communing, and give heed 

To the large march of stars, and enter in 

The spirit-crowded courts of solitude. 

Harriet Monroe 

THE WHITE MOTH 

Every night 
At my windy, when 

I quench the light 
Between nine an' ten, 

A White Moth 

Soars through the trees, 
Light as the froth 

Blown off of the seas. 

At the same time 
It flutters, white 

In the scented lime — 
Every night. 

Seems-like it is. 
When I draw the blind, 

As if the hair riz 
Straight off me mind. 

For, how do it come 
Just to the minute? — 

As if it heard some 
Clock strikin' in it. 

Seems like the spell 
Of some Mighty One, 

Come for to tell 
Of some thing I done! 


Rosamond LangMJge 

Seems like a sign 

I done him some hurt, 
When I whipped from his line 

Quilty's white shirt. 

Me heart wouldn't crack — 

But the spell would break 
If I took it back 

As a little mistake. 

Still . . . Fm no debtor 

To a bit of light froth: 
Maybe 'twould be better 

To crush the White Moth! 

THE GENTLE HOUSEWIFE 

There's the first white butterfly dancing abroad! 
There are wild wind-flowers dotting the sward; 
There are wild green breakers combing the bay; 
There's a red ferret darting over the way! 

But I am chiding the children for being so wild; 
I am chiding the nurse for chiding the child; 
I am careful to lay down tea-leaves in the hall; 
I am gazing at that spot of mildew on the wall — 
And my heart is breaking, breaking, 
With the hatred of it alll 

Rosamond Langbridge 

FULL OF LAUGHTER 

Very fall of laughter is the old man. 

The air is fall of wings 

Of the little birds of laughter. 

Which the old man flings 

From his mouth up to the rafter 

In the white-washed ceiling 

That vibrates with his laughter 

And quivers and sings; 

Till the little birds come stealing 

To the lips whence they came, 

And you only hear the laughter 

In the shaking of the flame, 

In the tapping of the leaves. 

And you only hear the laughter 

Very faintly if at all; 

Until, as you drowse, suddenly, once more. 

He awakes with a roar, 

And the laughter goes flapping from the ceiling to the wall. 

Very fall of laughter is the old man. 

Very full of laughter is the old man? . . . 

I know not what I say, 

I mistrust what I hear. 

There's an evil tongue licking where the log-fires play. 

The round cat heaves with a laughter and a fear. 

There are wells lying deeper 


Louis Golding 

Than the laughter in his eyes. 

There are glooms lying deeper 

Than the lost lands of the sleeper, 

There are sounds behind the laughter 

Which I dare not follow after, 

There's a choked heart tolling and a dumb child cries. 

There's an old mouth full of laughter, 

But a dumb heart cries. 

Louis Golding 

SYNCRASY 

I am a reed 

Wind-throated and rain-tuned. 
You are the player, 
VWse as the world. 

What will you blow through me, Softmouth? 

What sorrows must I echo 

From your honied lips 

To learn the sweetness of pain? 

What lachrymations must I silver 

To learn the bitterness of love? 

I am a reed 
Waiting and silent. 
You are the player. 
Searching your heart. 

A, A. Rosenthal 

KING ALFRED AND THE PEASANT WOMAN 

Throw me from the house — did he? 
Well, to new chivalry that is no great thing! 
I am my father's daughter, lady! 
And he*s a pretty figure in the ring. 

But my man, my master, there he sat a-dreaming 
While all the house might burn and he'd not sorrow; 
Nor had I any warrant that his scheming 
Would bring us any victory on the morrow. 

And I spoke to him! Oh, I informed him! 
He'd be a dead man if he were not stung; 
Could any man keep hands down, and me lashing? 
Friend, you insult my tongue! 

I'd rather he fought me than missed his combats. 
Though I'm not built for blows upon the heart. 
Give me a breast-plate, and I'll at 'em. 
Though that's fool-woman's part! 

I love him; and when he comes back with honor 
After the fight I drove him to is won, 
He'll find his woman with her glory on her. 
Please God, the child's a son! 




Anna Wickham 

A POET ADVISES A CHANGE OF CLOTHES 

Why wears my lady a trailing gown, 

And the spurious gleam of a stage queen's crown? 

Let her leap to a horse, and be off to the down! 

Astride, let her ride 

For the sake of my pride. 

That she is more ancient than Diana — 

Ancient as that she-ape who, lurking among trees, 

Dropt on a grazing zebra, gript him with her knees 

And was off across the breadths of the savannah; 

Barking her primal merry deviltry. 

Barking in forecast of her son's sovereignty. 

My timeless lady is as old as she. 

And she is moderner moreover 

Than Broadway, or an airship, or than Paris lingerie. 

O my eternal dominating dear. 

How much less dated thou than Guinevere! 

Then for your living lover 

Change your gown, 

And don your queenship when you doff your crown. 

Anna Wickham 



PREDICTION 

In some inimical starry night 
When the worthies are abed, 
Suddenly will come a flight 
Of baleful things about your head. 
These will not be simply bats 
(These, imponderable as leaves). 
These will not be timid gnats — 
These will be audacious thieves: 

Devils of the midnight's action. 
Wrong ones of the twisted spheres, 
A fluttering unholy faction 
Of Port Havoc mutineers. 

In your spirit's corridors 
There will, that night, be strange things: 
What were dances will be wars, 
There will be vain imaginings — 
Slaughter and knavery and laughter, 
Sights to make a man afraid. 
Boozing, cajoling, boasts^ and after 
(I need not say) you'll be betrayed. . . . 

Since the story is so bitter 
The quaint world will find its proofs — 
What is left of you will flitter 
Like a grey cat on the roofs. 

Morris Gilberi 


IN RUSSIA 

THE SPILLING OF THE WINE 

The soldiers lie upon the snow. 

That no longer gyrates under the spinning lights 

Night juries in her fat black hands. 

They will not babble any more secrets to loose-mouthed 

nights 
Expanding in golden auras, 
While sleigh-bells jingle like new coins the darkness 

shuffles ... 
They will not drink any more wine — 
V^ne of the Romanoffs, 
Jewelled wine 

The secret years worked slowly at 
Till it was wrought to fire, 
As stones are faceted 
Until they give out light. 
The soldiers lie very still. 
Their shadows have shrunk up close 
As toads shrink under a stone; 
And night and silence, 
The ancient cronies, 
Foregather above them. 

But still over the snow, that is white as a ram's fleece. 
Arms swing like scythes . . • 

[20I] 




 

And shadows in austere lines 

Sway in a monstrous and mysterious ritual — 

Shadows of the Kronstad sailors 

Pouring blood and wine. . . 

Wine 

Spurting out of flagons in a spray of amethyst and gold. 

Creeping in purple sluices; 

Wine 

And blood in thin bright streams 

Besprinkling the immaculate snow; 

Blood, high-powered with the heat of old vineyards. 

Boring . . . into the cool snow ... 

Blood and wine 

Mingling in bright pools 

That suck at the lights of Petrograd 

As dying eyes 

Suck in their last sunset. 

The night has a rare savor. 

Out of the snow-piles — altar-high and colored as by a 

rosy sacrifice — 
Scented vapor 

Ascends in a pale incense . . . 
Faint astringent perfume 
Of blood and wine. 




Lola Ridge 



SNOW DANCE FOR THE DEAD 



Dance, little children ... it is holy twilight . . . 
Have you hung paper flowers about the necks of the ikons ? 
Dance soft . . . but very gaily ... on tip-toes like the 

snow. 
Spread your little pinafores 
And courtesy as the snow does . . . 
The snow that bends this way and that 
In silent salutation. 

Do not wait to warm your hands about the fires. 
Do not mind the rough licking of the wind. 
Dance forth into the shaggy night that shakes itself upon 

you. 

Dance beneath the Kremlin towers — golden 

In the royal 

Purple of the sky — 

But not there where the light is strongest . . . 

Bright hair is dazzling in the light. 

Dance in the dim violet places 

Where the snow throws out a faint lustre 

Like the lustre of dead faces . . . 

Snow downier than wild-geese feathers . . . 

Enough filling for five hundred pillows . . . 

By the long deep trench of theMead. 

Bend, little children, 

To the rhythm of the snow 

That undulates this way and that 

In silver spirals. 

Cup your hands like tiny chalices . . . 

Let the flakes fill up the rosy 

Hollows of your palms 

And alight upon your hair, 

Like kisses that ding softly 

A moment and let go . . . 

Like many kisses falling altogether . . . 

Quick . . . cool kisses. 



THE WHITE BIRD 

Man of the flame-eyes 

And mouth with the bitter twist of in-grown laughter, 

And little bald man . . . whose seeming stillness 

Is akin to the velocity of a spinning star 

Holding its perfect poise — 

You two yea-sayers 

Beetling over the little deniers. 

Two great levelers, building from the earth up, among 

puttiers and pluggers of rotten piles — 
You of the rich life, running in ample measure, amidst 

life deleted of its old raw fire as earth b deleted 

of its coal and iron — 
You be mighty hunters and keepers, 
Trotsky and Lenine — 


Lola Ridge 

Yet can you hold . . . the unconstrainable One 
Of the slow and flaming deaths 
And multiple resurrections? 

Hands, reaching in hundreds of millions, 

Backs, straightening under the keeling floor of the world, 

Can you hold the great white bird? — 

She that sweeps low over the chain-gangs 

When they glance up from their stone-breaking 

Into morning's burning gold; 

She that goes down into underground cells. 

Sending the cool wind of her wings 

Through unsevering stone . . . 

And departs, unbeknown, from those who announce her. 

Saying : " Lo, she is ours !" 

Ah, what a mighty destiny shall be yours. 

Should you persuade her — 

The Unconstrainable One 

Who has slid out of the arms of so many lovers. 

Leaving not a feather in their hands! 

Lola Ridge 



[ao5] 




 
COMMENT 

SHELLEY 

IN these days of revolutionary changes it is appropriate 
to be reminded of Shelley by the centenary of his 
death; and the reminder may well lead us to a deeper 
study of the man and his work than a casual reading of 
The Cloud and The Skylark. For of all the ranking 
English poets, Shelley was preeminently the poet with 
a message — a type somewhat decried by modern esthetic 
theorists, who would not permit the muse to stiffen her 
lips with didactic emphasis. Even Milton, the Puritan 
partisan of Cromwell, pleader for free speech, free thought, 
free divorce and other heresies, was a conservative con- 
formist beside Shelley, whose stark idealism accepted no 
compromise, whose ardor for a complete revolution in 
human society would have been, like Lenin's, " the same 
in act as in desire" if he also could have faced the tragic 
. ironies of fate by achieving political power. 

Of course we have only the beginning of Shelley's think- 
ing, for he was under thirty, and young for his age, when 
he died. Yet there is a kind of finality about it, for he 
seems youth incarnate, youth immortal, and perhaps, as 
with the great mystics among whom Mr. Yeats classes 
him, old age with him would have been but a diviner 
childhood. Aflame with reformatory zeal, he theorized 
with complete conviction; and his theoretic picture of a 
perfect world was as untroubled by common sense as a 


Shelley 

cubistic painting, and as unaffected by the humane 
perspectives of humor. He had youth's singlemindedness, 
single-sigh tedness; perceiving a vivid truth, he struck out 
toward it through all obstacles, no matter how many 
conventions, laws, or even human hearts were broken on 
the way; only to be deflected from the immediate goal by 
the more flaming ardor of a newer revelation. 

His creed was essentially Godwin touched by emotion, 
eighteenth-century radicalism transfigured by a poet's 
dreams. Freedom, sacrosanct and glorified, 'was its 
cardinal principle: evil is an accident; could man always 
have been free he would never have wandered from 
virtue — "government is but the badge of his degrada- 
tion." Lift from his past history the incubus of the law, 
with its consequences of obedience, "fear, faith and 
slavery"; grant him through all his course freedom of 
thought, of action and of love, and man's career would 
have been one long millennium of universal justice. And 
now this long-delayed peace on earth must be invoked on 
the instant by chosen souls. Live out your life, fulfil all 
natural impulses so long as your heart is pure, restrain 
neither thought nor deed, and "neither change nor falter 
nor repent" — such was the counsel of perfection which his 
impulsive "practicalness" urged upon his puny neighbors 
and flaunted brightly in the face of the canting world. 
He had no time to wait or think. If his intellect built too 
slowly, his imagination lightly overleapt logic and perched 
upon cloudy ramparts for a sunrise song. 

The lyrics by which he is chiefly remembered were mere 
tangents from the rounding circle of his message — he 
would rather have destroyed them, probably, than let his 
fame rest upon such slight sparks of personal emotion, 
such flashes of joy or love or despair, thrown oflF casually 
while, from ^een Mab to The Triumph of Life^ he was 
summoning to action the hosts of a happier world. The 
language of his summons was clear. In The Masque of 
Anarchy and certain more directly political poems of 
anathema his faith in the power of the human soul utters 
a command to the proletariat of his time: 

Rise, like lions after slumber, 
In unvanquishable number! 
Shake your chains to earth like dew 
Which in sleep had fallen on you. 
Ye are many — they are few. 

In Prometheus Unbound this faith becomes an assertion of 
man's ultimate supremacy, when **the painted veil . . . 
called life ... is torn aside": 

The man remains — 
Sceptreless, free, uncircumscribed, but man: 
Equal, unclassed, tribeless and nationless; 
Exempt from awe, worship, degree; the king 
Over himself; just, gentle, wise — but man. 
Passionless? — no; yet free from guilt or pain, 
Which were, for his will made or suffered them; 
Nor yet exempt, though ruling them like slaves. 
From chance and death and mutability — 
The clogs of that which yet might oversoar 
The loftiest star of unascended heaven. 
Pinnacled dim in the intense inane. 


Shelley 

With a zealot's precision Shelley demanded the absolute. 
His was a religious spirit^ always fascinated by the super- 
natural, seeking communion with an impalpable divine 
essence. Therefore, in spite of the buffetings of fate, 
he stands for the revelation to men of ineffable spiritual 
realities beyond the reach of sensuous experience. His 
soul flamed upward like Blake's, though with less detach- 
ment. He explored the empyrean, he touched the 
intangible; his poetry brought down to earth the vision 
of supernal beauty which had eluded even the blind 
eyes of Milton. Through him the vitality of mystical 
abstractions, the power and sweep of subtle unseen 
forces, the loveliness of secret beauty, the glory of naked 
truth, and the upward reach of the human mind 
toward the infinite splendor, are given the fiery proof of 
song. On earth he was ill at ease; in the highest heaven 
of imagination his poise was perfect. He never wavered 
in his flight, never stooped to catch the popular ear, never 
d^aded for the sake of transient rewards a mission which 
seemed to him the holiest of all confided to mortal man. 
For poetry he held to be the noblest and most universal 
of the arts by which truth is made manifest to men, 
language being "as a mirror which reflects," and the 
materials of other arts "as a cloud which enfeebles, the 
light of which both are mediums." 

One is tempted to quote whole pages of his magnificent 
Defence of Poetry in this connection, an essay which makes 
a royal progress through the universe, and shows that the 


spirit of poetry is the manifestation of the eternal order 
and harmony, the vitalizing and regenerating principle, 
the exemplar of wisdom and the revealer of love, the soul 
of aspiration, "'the echo of the eternal music"; the 
destroyer, too, of wrong — a "sword of lightning, ever un- 
sheathed, which consumes the scabbard that would 
contain it." As an art, "poetry redeems from decay the 
visitations of the divinity in man," being " the record of 
the best and happiest moments of the happiest and best 
minds." He defends these happiest and best minds, who 
"make immortal all that is best and most beautiful in the 
world," from the charges the world has brought against 
their lives; insisting that their frailties are merely the 
rebound of what is animal and passionate in their nature 
from a spiritual exaltation they experience and express 
but do not understand. 

Poets are the hierophants of an unapprehended inspiration; the 
mirrors of the gigantic shadows which futurity casts upon the present; 
... the trumpets which sing to battle and feel not what they inspire; 
the influence which is moved not, but moves. Poets are the unacknowl- 
edged legislators of the world. 

He at least would be true to his high office. He would 
illumine a path for men's hopes to travel even though they 
mocked him. The glorious vision of an exalted destiny 
for his race was before him, and in the fit disclosure of that 
vision he felt secure of immortal influence, even though 
the world rejected him in life. And the world did reject 
him. He threw down the gauntlet and his country took 

[2IO] 



 



Shelley 

it up. His name was the synonym for unspeakable 
crimes, his poems were a target for the wrath and ridicule 
of reviewers, their small editions lay unsold with his 
publisher, and his sympathetic readers could be counted 
on the fingers of one hand. It was long after his death 
that the song of "the nightingale who sat in darkness" 
began to penetrate to men's ears. 

For in form, as well as in feeling, Shelley was a 
revolutionist, and therefore unwelcome. English poetry 
was but newly awake from its eighteenth-century trance. 
Coleridge, Bums and the quiet Wordsworth had brushed 
away forever those reams of rhymed eloquence with which 
Pope and his kind had smothered the goddess; but the 
world was as yet scarcely aware of it, preferring the old 
heroics. Though Byron was forcing down its throat his 
modern message, Shelley and Keats were still exotics — 
outlandish birds singing a wild strain. Perhaps Shelley 
himself scarcely realized how diflFerent his style was from 
all that had been so long in vogue. Like every true poet, 
he had an instinct for form; and it was probably by 
instinct, rather than deliberate intention, that he followed 
Coleridge in breaking the long reign of the iambic measure, 
that he played with anapaests and trochees, and surpassed 
in delicate complexity of rhythm even the gay Eliza- 
bethans. For the expression of modern subtleties he 
added more strings to their instrument, and passed it on 
to us enriched with new notes and capable of a broader 
range. 

Beauty, love and freedom are the triune chord at the 
basis of Shelley's song. We hear it agdn and again, like 
the Holy Grail motive in Parsifal. Prometheus Unbound 
is the spirit of freedom, braving omnipotent tyranny for 
love of the human race, who still declares, after aeons of 
agony: 

I would fain 
Be what it is my destiny to be. 
The savior and the strength of suffering man, 
Or sink into the original gulf of things — 

and at whose release and reunion with Nature, when 
Eternity has conquered the evil principle of Power, all 
earth and her children rejoice in the ecstasy of inextin- 
guishable love and holiness and peace. Shelley is at home 
in the heaven of heavens; the Prometheus soars like livid 
flame, and its choruses reach a celestial height of lyric 
exaltation. Whether spirits or echoes or furies speak, 
they speak with eternity behind and before them, reveal 
to us birthless and deathless minds. 

Prometheus and Adonais and the lyrics are the best of 
SheUey ; for in most of the longer poems, as even occasion- 
ally in these, he does not escape grandiloquence. With 
Coleridge and Burns and Keats he restored the lost 
Elizabethan tradition, resumed the grand manner, even 
though his one deliberately Elizabethan experiment was a 
failure. It is curious that this radical could not carry his 
radicalism into the theatre. The Cenci is an imitative 
dramatic essay rather than a drama, an experiment in the 
Elizabethan manner modified by classic austerities. It 


SheUey 

out-Wcbsters Webster in horrors, but misses Webster's 
vitality; its characters are premeditated types rather than 
suffering men and women. 

Shelley met the world of men and women with the 
solemn, unquestioning belief of some flower or child, 
and when things proved not what they seemed he thought 
they must be the exact reverse. The strength of the recoil 
was the natural result of the violent eagerness of the 
attack, and it was all a part of his passionate youthfulness. 
For not only the glories of youth but its weaknesses were 
his — its irreverence, its fiery impatience, its haughty 
intolerance of the work-a-day world, its reckless daring in 
the first onset flagging under prolonged effort. Thus it is 
by his upward reach more than his capacity for sustained 
flight that Shelley wins his place among the masters. 
For this reason his lyrics are the most typical expression 
of his genius. These are the record of his vdent emotion- 
alism; each one comes fresh from a burning mood. There 
b no time for inconstancy, for the dulling of the fine edge 
of inspiration, such as makes even the Prometheus 
strongest in its first act, a thing which can not be said of 
a faultless work of art. 

If he had lived to be old the record might be different. 
But as yet his thinking had not passed through youth's 
sense of dissonance and unreality. When he died he was 
still aloof from life: '"As to real flesh and blood," he said, 
"you know I do not deal in those articles;" and he called 
himself "the knight of the shield of shadow and the lance 

of gossamere." Humanity disappointed him, and even 
the momentary joy of dreams brought despair in its wake. 
It was because of the very ardor of his ecstasies that life 
was for Shelley a series of disillusions. One after another 
the raptures of his youth went out, and his path grew 
darker and more lonely to the end. He died at a crucial 
point in his development, when everything seemed to be 
falling away from him, when the stru^le with despond- 
ency was tempting him to suicide, "that golden key to 
the chamber of perpetual rest." If he had lived longer he 
must either have withdrawn more and more from actual- 
ities or have emerged into a more mature and humane 
wisdom. 

But we need not quarrel with his fate, or lament that 
his eager, restless, baffled spirit found swift repose in 
death. Life could scarcely have satisfied him — in the 
very exaltation of his purpose lay its doom. As it is, we 
may recognize in him the spirit of immortal youth, who 
had scarcely time to cry, "Then what is life?" before fate 
sealed his lips. In Adonais he prophetically praises death 
as if for his own burial, but in that last moment of the 
storm on the Gulf of Spezia he might have sung a still 
grander song. For he was glad to die. He was one of 

... the sacred few who could not tame 
Their spirits to the conqueror, but as soon 
As they had touched the world with living flame 
Fled back like eagles to their native noon. 

H.M. 

 



Digit! 



zed by Google 



A New Pulitzer Prize 

A NEW PULITZER PRIZE 

The award of a Pulitzer Prize of one thousand dollars 
to the Collected Poems of Edwin Arlington Robinson is 
a most agreeable surprise, as this is the first Pulitzer 
Prize ever granted to a poet. 

Four years ago, when the Poetry Society of America 
gave its first annual five hundred dollars to Sara Teas- 
dale's Love SongSy the award, being made in conjunction 
with the Pulitzer prizes, was falsely attributed to the 
same origin. An editorial in Poetry for August, 191 8, 
called attention, as follows, to the omission of poetry 
from the will: 

Mr. Pulitzer's will, creating a school of journalism at Columbia 
Univeruty, with annual thousand-dollar prizes for a novel, an editorial, 
a book of science, etc., omitted poetry. Probably he never thought 
of ib— nobody was thinking of poetry during the period when his will 
was drawn. Of course the omission of poetry from any prize-list which 
included at least two literary products, the novel and the play, was 
preposterous; and we may hope that the present donor, or other donors, 
may permanently atone for the slight with an annual prize as large as 
the other prizes. 

The poem of each year — or book of poems — ^must be, we submit, 
at least as prize-worthy as the editorial of the year. It may be, of 
course, of a value immeasurably greater, for, by the favor of the gods, 
it may be a masterpiece, an enduring work of genius — a distinction 
which could scarcely be claimed for any editorial. 

When this year's awards were announced, with Mr. 
Robinson's book among them, the editor wrote to Colum- 
bia University a letter inquiring about the improved 
status of poets; and received the following answer: 

To the Editor: • In reply to your letter of May 24th I beg to say that 
the poetry prize to which you refer was established by the Advisory 
Board of the School of Journalism at their meeting in May, 1921, at 
which meeting it was on motion unanimously 

"Resohed, That a prize of One thousand dollars be established for 
the best volume of verse published during the year by an American 
author." 

The Board at the same time discontinued another prize for which 
there had been no competition, which action set free sufficient funds 
to establish the poetry prize. Frank D. Fackenihal 

The initial award is of course worthy of all praise, 
though the committee may have regretted that they 
could not honor also Miss Millay's Second April. Indeed, 
the year 1921, presenting two such books, was singularly 
rich. The three members of the poetry jury were Wilbur 
L. Cross, Richard Burton and Ferris Greenslet. Though 
we cannot criticize the verdict in this case, we must 
repeat once more our plea that all juries should be strictly 
professional, and that poets alone have the right and the 
authority to award honors in their art. H. M. 

REVIEWS 

CARLOS WILLIAMS* NEW BOOK 

Sour GrapeSy by William Carlos Williams. Four Seas Co. 
This is, I believe, the fourth book that Dr. Williams has 
published. The Tempers^ which came first, was a bit thin, 
but contained two fine poems of their sort. Next came 
Al ^ue ^uiere, a hard-bitten book that attempted to 
create poetry out of urban modernity. Sour Grapes 

 



 



Carlos fViUiatns* New Book 

develops, more or less, the manner of Al ^ue ^uiere, and 
probably contains a greater number of successful poems. 
In between these two came Kora in Hell, a mass of prose 
fragments of Flaubertian precision, that as a whole got 
nowhere. 

Dr. Williams has a considerable leaning toward the 
'"conceit," and some of his finest poems are examples of 
it, although at other times he drags this structure in by 
the heels. By "conceit" I mean an intellectual relation- 
ship between two objects physically unrelated, one of 
which fuses with the sound and takes on an image 
existence. For example, the poem called To fFaken an 
Old Lady: 

Old age is 

a flight of small 

cheeping birds 

skimming 

bare trees 

above a snow glaze. 

Gaining and failing, 

they are buffeted 

by a dark wind. 

But what? 

On harsh weedstalks 

the flock has rested, 

the snow 

IS covered with broken 

seedhusks, 

and the wind tempered 

by a shrill 

piping of plenty. 

Such poems as this and Tlu NightingaleSy as the Love 
Song in Al^ue ^uiere beginning "Sweep the house dean," 
are as perfect and as final as Herrick; they make a reviewer 
feel ridiculous. But in A Celebration the method is 
worked to death — perhaps because it was a bit tired 
before it got under way and then had a long way to go; 
and in Primrose the conceit is superfluous. If we had 
been given the images without the explanatory yellow, 
they would have hit harder. 

In such poems as The Widofxfs Lament in Sprinpimey 
however, one finds the simple physical image — the image 
without ulterior "meaning" or even metaphor — ^used with 
great power: 

Today my son told me 

that in the meadows, 

at the edge of the heavy woods 

in the distance, he saw 

trees of white flowers. 

I feel that I would like 

to go there 

and fall into those flowers 

and sink into the marsh near them. 

Dr. Williams concerns himself with certain phases of 
American life, which he seems to feel acutely; and up to 
date he is not the dupe of his material. That is, he knows 
that stenographic reports of snowbirds or hawthorns do 
not suflice, even when smeared with pretty language. He 
looks for relations and the sharpest way to get them 
down. 

Despite all Dr. Williams' passion to the contrary, he is 
greatly influenced by his contemporaries and predecessors 


Carlos JViUiams^ New Book 

— by which I do not mean to condemn him, but simply to 
indicate that he, like any good writer, is inextricably 
caught in Mr. Eliot's "'tradition." His prose is obviously 
of the school of Flaubert, and his verse has gone through 
various influences. The poems in this book have, for the 
most part, worked away from the earlier jagged bitterness, 
into a certain serenity of manner that one associates with 
Mr. Pound's Chinese translations — a manner that Mr. 
Pound (among others) has used consciously and success- 
fully. How conscious Dr. Williams' use of it may be, I do 
not know; but if it is used unconsciously, it may be 
dangerous — the poet may cease to be able to see his 
material through the sticky haze of his manner. Anyway 
one has a right to wonder, when so many of Dr. Williams' 
trivialities {Springs Epitaph^ etc.) have become sweet 
instead of censorable. His grapes are not so sour as they 
once were, although this may be no great matter. 

There are more fine poems in the book than one can 
mention in a short review, among the most extraordinary 
being Romance ModemCy despite a few low spots. Occa- 
sionally a good poem is marred by some unnecessary 
triteness, as Overture to a Dance of Locomotives by its title 
and last line. Several fine poems have been omitted, 
among them Wild Orchard and A Coronal. I choose to 
end by quoting one poem without comment — The 
Nightingale: 

My shoes, as I lean 

unlacing them, 

stand out upon 

[219\ 




 

flat worsted flowers 

under my feet. 

Nimbly the shadows 

of my fingers play 

unladng 

over shoes and flowers. 



Yvor Winters 



A SUNLIT CLEARING 



Dreams OtU of Darkness, by Jean Starr Untermeyer. B. 

W. Huebsch. 

Jean Starr Untermeyer is so completely a mistress of 
form, that, though at times her content is weak, one still 
admires. To have pinned down form in these days of 
wavering outline! Lake Song realizes the lake suggestion, 
the rush forward and the sudden restraint, through toning 
down, becoming almost prose but subtly avoiding prose. 
The rhythm grows upon one, but since the matter is 
slight and inapt, grows upon one as a pattern woven of 
air, such an intangible pattern as the wind might have 
woven above her lake. In Sinfonia DomesHca and many 
other of the 'Voman" poems the poet is fundamental. 
These poems, when they do fail, fail for lack ofle mot juste; 
they are always psychologically poignant. Mastery of 
form is one achievement; of spirit, another; of diction, 
word and image, still another. Although I can understand 
how one might call Sinfonia Domestica a fine poem for its 
theme and passion, for me, although I grant the theme 
and passion and call them fundamental, it is a '* beating 


A Sunlit Clearing 

about the bush": there are many words but few clear-cut 
images, so many words that the essential motive is almost 
submerged. For me the two lines in the poem are: 

And bank my flame to a low hearth-fire, believing 
You'll come for warmth and life to its tempered gtow. 

From the Road in November is a good example of poetic 
paradox: expressing a thought in such a fashion as to 
create an atmosphere belying it. The first stanza is The 
Road in November^ no questioning that; the second and 
third stanzas are comfortable pictures having nothing to 
do with either November or death, so completely depart- 
ing from the keynote that the last two lines of the third 
stanza, in which the primary mood recurs, are rendered 
impotent. 

But then the last line of Little Dirge — 

My youth is slipping through the door — 

is SO complete and so profound that it might be one of 
Yvor Winters' Musterbook poems, and stand alone. 

In Berkshire Twilight, again paradox. The first stanza 
is inconsequential; I quote the second: 

Evening drops over their peaks 
And chars their flame. 
Their cok>r sifts into grajmess. 
With me it is the same. 

A preponderance of r% voluptuous sound that nullifies 
the negativity of even such a word as chars. There are 
certain words that, in spite of their accepted definition, 

one may not use in writing in certain contexts. Flame 
and color here outweigh not only grayness and sifty but the 
three dulling periods. The poem has the effect of a double 
negative. Impressionism understands the art of juxta- 
position of word as of sound and of color. I am put in 
jmind of two lines of an autumn poem by Janet Lewis: 

The deer, the deer, among the withered asters. 
The spider making tight his web. 

On Temples y though propagandistic, is apt. Eve Before 

the Tree I should call a brave failure. The story scarcely 

lends itself to psychological treatment. It has in fact 

been told perfectly in the third chapter of Genesis. 

Consciousness is the anathema of this generation. Let 

us pray that our children will not be introspective. Eve 

analyzes, digs up motives; she is more the Eve of after the 

eating than before it. Not to mention such anachronisms 

as: 

If there was life before 
I have forgotten it, nor can remember 
Father nor mother, sister, nurse, nor friend. 

Dreams Out of Darkness is in truth uneven in texture. 
Throughout one finds an abundant womanly sympathy, 
the power of nice observation, and a deftness in the 
employment of metrics. The rhythms are plastic and 
comfortable. If one objects to the paucity of idea in, 
say. Misty one finds oneself instantly refuted by the 
authenticity of Anti-erotic and Little Dirge. Throughout 
one finds vacillation between the naturalistic method and 


A Sunlit Clearing 

the conventionally poetic. The tone is muted, always in 
a low key. There are no new words, no significant digres- 
sions, no discoveries. But one has a sense of having gone 
into a woman's heart, found it lovely and understandable, 
and come out satisfied with womankind. The tiptoe of 
rapture, however, is not there. Two and a Child is perhaps 
representative: 

Does the spring night call little boys 

As it calls their wild young mothers? 

But what can a child know of us — or others? 

He has different joys. 

A tree that bend? and almost smothers 

Two in the road who clasp and quiver, 

To him is only a swing by the river — 

One of his outdoor toys. 

Put him to bed and let us flee 

Out in the night with other lovers. 

It will not be long till he discovers 

What's known to you and me. 

And then when a desdned maiden hovers 

Near for what only he can give her . . . 

No! Close the door. What makes me shiver? 

I will stay here. Let me be. 

Pearl Andehon 

TARNISHED GOLD 

Paul Verlaine^ by Harold Nicolson. Houghton Mifflin G). 
This book is a dispassionate appraisal of the life and 
work of the greatest French symbolist poet. The reader 
who delights in a good biography should follow step by 
step through his dark byways of struggle this poet of the 

'* shifty Mongolian eyes/' should apprehend his pitiful 
weaknesses and failures. He was like other boys con- 
stitutionally, although perhaps handicapped by the fact 
that he was the only child of parents who were already 
middle-aged when he was born. It is interesting to read 
of his days of schooling, of how at eighteen he obtained 
his degree at the Sorbonne, "like other ordinary French 
schoolboys, with no brilliance, but quite creditably." Mr. 
Nicolson tells us that in general Verlaine's childhood had 
little effect upon his future development. The great factor 
in his life was alcohol, and this had not menaced him 
before the age of eighteen. 

Verlaine's life is the story of hopes and disappointments 
not unknown to other poets. But in his case the green 
of absinthe spread its taint over everything. He made 
great efforts at reform, notably once when for a year the 
influence of his young wife kept him sober. But the evil 
days returned invariably, and he became an habitual 
inebriate. It is hard to believe that in spite of the devils 
which were dragging him down his literary output did not 
seem to suffer, and that some of liis most beautiful poems 
were born of these times. 

And yet many of those which he wrote before this 
period have touched the human heart more poignantly 
than those of his maturer years; indeed in the last few 
years of his life his work sometimes showed Symbolism 
gone wrong — it was so steeped in intimate details as to be 
banal. But Verlaine at his best can throw us into an 


Tarnished Gold 

atmosphere: if he writes about a mist, the hair feels wet 
with mist; if he writes of a garden we actually inhale the 
warm perfume, so subtly does he use intimacy, suggestion, 
association — the fundamentals of Symbolism. Other 
poetry has had these qualities, from the Greeks down; 
but, as Mr. Nicholson points out: "The Symbolists were 
the first to raise what had been an accidental virtue in 
others to the level of a doctrine for themselves." And he 
says also: "Verlaine did not invent Symbolism — he 
certainly did not direct its future development; but he 
was able at the psychological moment to catch and reflect 
the floating aspiration, and to give to it a definite cadence 
and a form." 

A comparatively large portion of the book is devoted to 
the life of Arthur Rimbaud, and after reading these 
chapters we realize that to have given less space to the 
subject would have been to omit what is a valuable con- 
tribution to a true understanding of Verlaine's character. 
Mr. Nicolson has scant liking for Rimbaud, and his 
picture of this writer is not attractive. A large, red-fisted 
boy, with filthy hair that hung down lank between his 
shoulders, a snub nose and a damp fleshy mouth. He 
regards his entrance into the life of Verlaine as the greatest 
influence for evil that ever came near it. He tells us how 
Rimbaud forced himself upon Verlaine, how Verlaine 
forced Rimbaud upon his literary intimates in Paris — a 
very tactless performance, and how he dragged him to 
gatherings where he behaved like the boor he was and 

JFrotn which he was promptly excluded. He became linked 

with all his friend's doings: he drank with him, helped 

him to spend his poor mother's capital, left him when 

there were no resources, and reappeared when he found it 

to his profit to do so; and he enticed him on the fateful 

and ever to be regretted trip to London. 

Yet the most enthusiastic followers of Rimbaud cannot 

accuse Mr. Nicolson of having failed to estimate his work 

at its true value. In speaking of the Bateau Ivre he calls 

it an astounding production: 

That is should be the work of a boy of sixteen is well-nigh incredible. 
In the glare of its inspiration the glib architecture of the Pamasaans, 
the cadence of Verlaine's own poetry, assume but a paltry complexion. 
No wonder that the generation of today looks for stimulus to Rimbaud 
rather than to Verlaine or even Mallarm^ — to Rimbaud, who at nine- 
teen was forever to fling literature behind him. 

He designates Saison en Enfer as an acid human document, 
and speaks at length of Les Illuminations^ which, after the 
former, is most typical of Rimbaud's "unpleasing genius." 
Aube^ in this collection, he considers to be as fine a prose 
poem as exists in any language. 

Mr. Nicolson explains that he had hoped at first to give 
in an appendix a translation of the poems quoted in the 
text. We are glad that he abandoned the plan. Doubt- 
less he, if anyone, could express Verlaine's poetry in 
English. But attempts by others to render into our 
language even French poets more easily translated are 
almost sure to be disappointing, few of the results rising 
above libretto English. Mr. Nicolson has decided wisely, 


Tarnished Gold 

and it is a pleasure to find that he has given us almost all 
of the poems which are the most exquisite or the most 
characteristic in the tongue in which they were meant to 
exist. The author says: "Verlaine of all poets is too 
elusive to admit of translation^ and above all of a literal 
translation into English prose.'' This is what I have 
maintained whenever I have spoken of Verlaine's work in 
other articles in this magazine. The peculiar music is 
purely an emanation of his own atmosphere — perhaps 
more so than in the case of any other foreign poet. His^ 
syncopation is of the sort to be found in no other language 
than his own. To omit it, or to try to approach its like, 
could hardly fail to be a distortion. 

This whole book is carried through with a subtle, yet 
firm and often audacious touch. Scholarly it certainly is, 
but not in the sense of that word which restricts the 
pedagogic mind. There are a few inaccuracies — the 
American reader will be surprised to learn that Stuart 
Merrill is an Englishman! — and there are occasional 
phrases which startle; but these are slight flaws. 

The author bares Verliune's weaknesses and gives his 
mitigating characteristics, without a hint as to his own 
opinions regarding them. He lays the facts before you, 
and it is for you to conclude. He tells us, incidentally, 
in the Rimbaud chapters, that Verlaine had no spark of 
jealousy or personal ambition, and that he flung himself 
with real generosity into the task of helpings other poets. 
Those who derive from this poet's work only an aroma of 

the wine-shop, who picture him first of all as a vulgar sot, 
will have a change of heart after reading this biography. 
Paul Verlaine had noble traits, he had lovable traits; and 
these went into his poetry. Agnes Lee Freer 

SLAVIC POETRY 

Modern Russian Poetry^ selected and translated by 

Babette Deutsch and Avrahm Yarmolinsky. Harcourt, 

Brace & G). 
Anthology of Modem Slavonic Literature^ translated by P. 

Selver. E. R Button & Co. 
Modem Czech Poetry y translated by P. Selver. E. P. 

Dutton & G). 
An Anthology of Jugoslav Poetry. Edited by Dr. B. S. 

Stanoye^ch. Richard G. Badger. 

The vigor and elegantly tutored violence of the Russian 
ballet, the drastic investigations and discoveries of Rus- 
sian fiction, the naive splendor of Russian piunting, and 
Russian music with its delicate French soul in a rioting 
body, may lead you to expect, in Russian poetry, some- 
thing equally vivid and fresh, a balancing surprise. You 
may be prepared, as I was, to add to the French and 
English — the only modern literatures, so far as I can dis- 
cover, that have a life and character of their own and 
enjoy the distinction of possessing masterpieces — a Rus- 
sian literature embodying that figment of the European 
imagination, the Slavic Soul. 


Slavic Poetry 

Modem Russian Poetry j if approached with such expec- 
tationsy will bring a somewhat chilly disillusion. For 
until the last pages there are no particularly arresting 
poems. And the last poems, while they deal with events 
that may be localized, have fortunately no local flavor. 
They are written in the tone and from the attitude of 
the modern man everywhere in the world; in the same 
idiom and with the same ratiocination. 

In many ways the haunting anachronism of Russia's 
political machine has stalked and parried its poems. One 
feels not only confusion, but even evasion, of realities. 
Russian poets have been led to sentimentalize their atti- 
tude to the land, to life, to the peasantry, to the misery 
of Russia. Patriotism and Revolution trespass continu- 
ally, and are unpleasantly immobilized in figures of speech. 
And foo often the poets' exaltation is the rapid breath of 
running away; their simplicity, the content of hasty 
refuge. 

Russian life is too tentative, too provisional. If stands 
stark in the thinking; the hurdle of every decision. To 
my mind, it has been the reason for much of the mysticism. 
Much of the pessimism and despair is also traceable to 
this ghastly warning. To be faced continually with this 
lean and quick-legged and always outstripping 7/" is finally 
to lose hope. 

Alexander Blok in his wonderful Scythians repeats it. 
Russia is undecided, wavering. She is between East and 
West, between a beloved betrayer and his foe ambushed 

by her elbow. Magnificent and challenging is the poem; 
a clue to the instability of Russian life. 

As this anthology reveals it, we have the poetry of a 
troubled minor literature, exceedingly rich in promise. 
Unless it is a mere activity of sick nerves, the intensity 
of life in Russia today should bring great poetry — is 
bringing a hint of it in the poetry of the minute. 

The book may be r^arded also as a fine contribution to 
English literature. Never is one conscious that the work 
is a translation. For the approximately one hundred and 
twenty Russian poems which have been rendered, parallel 
English poems have been created. 

The notes are perhaps too copious. They make of the 
book almost a guide to Russian literature, with excerpts 
for illustration. The method betrays itself most keenly 
when, in the case of Baratynsky, a closely printed para- 
graph of two hundred words introduces a verselet of six 
puny lines whose banality too impudently satirizes the 
expectations raised by the fattening preface. 

To realize that nationalism has made a great master of 
Pushkin is to appreciate the unhappy effects of this 
virtuoso emotion, proud of the iridescence of stagnation. 
Reports come that young poets are harking back to Push- 
kin — it is pitiful, with so many powerful men about them. 

To me the book's area of interest begins with Valery 
Brusov, although stray poems before him paint the desert. 
Ivanov, Blok, Byely, Kluyev, Yesenin, Oreshin, and 
Marienhof — these shouting, a bit strident, a bit knowing, 


Slavic Poetry 

but independent and conscious young poets are the poets 

of Russia. The buzzing Pushkin, the crooning Lermontov, 

the ballyhooing Konstantin Balmont, are the bad starts 

of Russian poetry. 

These young men write as original poets are writing in 

England, France and America. Marienhof might almost 

be a Russian visit of Ezra Pound: 

Jesus is on the Cross ag^ain, and Barrabas 
We escort, mealy-mouthed, down the Tverskoi Prospekt. . . 
Who will interrupt, who? The gallop of Scythian horses? 
Violins bowing the Marseillaise? 



Pile rubbish, all the rubbish in a heap; 
And like Savonarola, to the sound of hymns. 
Into the fire with it. . . Whom should wc fear? — 
When the mundiculi of puny souls have become — ^worlds. 

A quatrain from Yesenin contains an image that has 
obsessed me: 

From empty straths, a slender arch ascending: 

Fog curls upon the air and, moss-wise, grows; 

And evening, low above the wan streams bending, 

In their white waters washes his blue toes. 

These whbpers will not give any suggestion of the full- 
throated singing of the two poets quoted. For these, 
and their splendid company in the last half of the book, 
redeem the whole book; make it about as valuable as 
any book of poetry recently issued in America. 

Mr. Selver's Anthology of Slavonic Literature attempts 
too much, and therefore the results are negligible. The 
job might as well not have been done. To represent 

adequately the prose of Russia, Poland, Bohemia, Jugo- 
Slavia, etc., in one ordinary volume, and pack in the 
poetry of these peoples as well, is so obviously futile that 
it is a wonder to me that so accomplished an editor and 
critic tried to do it. 

Mr. Selver's book of Czech verse is admirable, however. 
The translation flavor is sometimes on these verses, but 
it gives an exotic aroma which makes one pleasantly 
aware of tasting something foreign. One feels that the 
pre-contemporary Czech poets were stronger and more 
robust than their brothers in Russia. This little book 
will serve as a companion to Modem Russian Poetry ^ 
although different in spirit . and manner, and even in 
format. The original texts are included. 

Space is lacking for extracts, which indeed would give 
scarcely a hint of the quality of some of the poetry in 
this book; but I wish to call attention to a remarkable 
nationalist, whose utterance has the stark obsessive 
simplicity of frenzy, and is extraordinarily effective: Pietr 
Bezruc, whose poems are too long and continuous for 
quotation. They are written somewhat in the sweeping 
manner of Whitman, who has strongly influenced Czech 
poetry. 

The Stanoyevich anthology is mentioned last because 
it has so little affinity with the others. Its title is 
anomalous, for all the poetry given is folk-song. The 
specimens given are melodious, charming, but a bit one- 
stringed and monotonous. Isidor Schneider 


NOTES 

Mr. Alfred Kreymborg, author of Mushrooms^ Blood of Things, 
Plays for Poem-mimes , Plays for Merry- Andrews, founder of Others of 
happy memory, has often appeared in Poetry. Since his retirement 
from the editorship of the international monthly Broom, Mr. and Mrs. 
Kreymborg have left Rome and at last accounts were sojourning at 
Rapallo. Pianissimo will be included in a book to be published this 
autumn — by which of his numerous publishers the author does not 
. state. 

Miss Lola Ridge, now once more in New York, has recently become 
the American editor of Broom, with an office at 3 East Ninth Street. 
Her books. The Ghetto and Sun-up, are published by B. W. Huebsch. 

Mr. John Hall Wheelock, of New York, author of Dust and Light 
and earlier books of verse, will publbh, through Charles Scribner's 
Sons, a new book this autumn. 

Mr. Morris Gilbert is now once more in New York, after his naval 
service in the war and later experiences in the Near East and elsewhere. 
His first volume, A Book of Verse, was issued privately in 19 17. 

Mr. A. A. Rosenthal is now living in Birmingham, Ala. 

Of the three English poets represented this month, two have appeared 
before in Pobtry: 

Mrs. Anna Wickham's first book. The Contemplative Quarry, was 
first published in London, by the Poetry Book Shop, in 191 5, when 
Padraic G)lum reviewed it in our pages. Last year Harcourt Brace 
& Co. issued a larger volume under a double title. The Contemplative 
^arry and The Man with a Hammer, with an appreciative introduction 
by Louis Untermeyer. A new volume will appear this aiitumn. 

Mr. Louis Golding is the author of Sorrows of War (E. P. Dutton 
& Co.) and Shepherd Singing Ragtime, Mr. Golding, usually in Lon- 
don, is now sojourning in the Austrian Tyrol. 

Miss Rosamond Langbridge, a resident of Hambrook, Hampshire, 
England, is the only poet of the month who is new to our readers. 

Mr. E. K. Broadus requests the correction of an error in the Notes 
of our May number. He is of the faculty of the University of Alberta, 
Canada, not the University of Manitoba. 


BOOKS RECEIVED 

ORIGINAL verse: 

All Around Brunswick, by Annie 0'G>nnor. Glover Bros., Brunswick, 
Ga. 

The SouPs Voice, by Elizabeth Voss. Richard G. Badger. 

Song and Dream, by D. W. Newsom. Stratford Co., Boston. 

Singing Rivers, by Dorothy Una Ratdiffe. Bodley Head, London. 

Moonlight and Common Day, by Louise Morey Bowman. MacmiUan 
Co. of Canada, Toronto. 

Satire and Romance, by Noah F. Whitaker. Pri. ptd., Springfield, O. - 

Heavenly Mansions, by C. C. Walsh. Pri. ptd., San Angelo, Tex. 

Point de Mire, by Celine Arnauld. Jaques Povolosky & Co., Paris. 

Sonnets from Tuscany and Other Poems, by Lucia. Basil BlackweU, 
Oxford, Eng. 

A Gate oj Cedar, by Katharine Morse. Macmillan Co. 

Blue Lakes to Golden Gates, by Saxe Churchill Stimson. Pri. ptd., Mil- 
waukee, Wis. 

Slabs qf the Sunburnt fFest, by Carl Sandbui^. Harcourt, Brace & Co. 

ANTHOLOGIES AND TRANSLATIONS: 

Prosds Projanas, by Ruben Dario. Translated by Charles B. 

McMichael. Nicholas L. Brown, New York. 
Old English Poetry — Translations into Alliterative Verse, by J. Duncan 

Spaeth. University Press, Princeton, N. J. 
Companions — an Anthology, Samuel A. Jacobs, New York. 
Poems from Punch, i^og-iQ20, edited by W. B. Drayton Henderson. 

Macmillan & Co., London. 

prose: 
The Laureateship: A Study of the Office of Poet Laureate, with Some 

Account of the Poets, by Edmund Kemper Broadus. Clarendon 

Press, Oxford, Eng. 
Creative Unity, by Sir Rabindranath Tagore. Macmillan Co. 
Four Doses, by Igie Pulliam Wetterdorf. Stratford Co. 
The New Poetry — A Study Outline, prepared by Mary PTescott Parsons. 

H. W. Wilson Co., New York. 
On English Poetry, by Robert Graves. Alfred A. Knopf. 
The So^alled Human Race, by Bert Leston Taybr. Alfred A. Knopf. 


We Are Backing the Poets-^ %»^ 
Are You Backing Us? 



For a vcrsc-writer to be printed in POETRY is about the 

most honorable of recognitions. 

Ford Madox Huifftr in thi New Yofi 
Evening Post Literary Review. 

This monthly publication is an exhibition of Uterary faith 
and bravery that belong to the heroic age. 

The Daily Journal, East St. Louis 

The varied interest and beauty presented are typical of 
POETRY'S quality. Thanks to a rare coincidence of 
poise and generous imagination, of sense and sensitiveness, 
it ranks easily as the best vehicle of poetry in the English 
language. 

From an editorial in the New York Sunday Tribune. 

POETRY has become a significant force 
in the intellectual life of America. That 
astute observer, the late William Marion 
Reedy, wrote: **Probably Miss Monroe has 
done more for the high art of song than any 
other person in the United States'' — a state- 
ment which has been generously supported 
by other commentators of similar prestige. 

POETRY: A Magazine of Verse 
232 E. Erie St.» Chicago 

Enclosed find $3.00 (Canada, $3.15; foreign, $3.25) 
for one year's subscription to POETRY. 

Beginning 

Name 

Address 



 



THE MOST CONVENIErn', NUTRITIOUS AND 
DELICIOUS FOOD-DRINK FOR FAMILY USE 

"Horlick's" 

The Original 

Malted Milk 

Quickly prepared. No cooking. No additions. Excel- 
lent keeping qualities. Suppues, at a moment's notice, 
a most palatable table beverage, satisfying and invigor- 
ating. Convenient luncheon. Refreshes whenever 
hungry or fatigued. Served hot, induces restfJB^^ilaap. 

Specify **HarUcie^' at the fountain qr 
when purchasing in Jars for home usf • 



MISS HARRIET MONROE 

who has studied the poetry movement 
m all its phases, will consider engage- 
ments for lectures, and readings of 
modem poetry, during the autumn 
and winter of 1922-1923. 

.. For terms, dates and other detaib 
please address 

POETRY 

232 East Erie Street, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 






 



Vol. XX 




No. V 




A Magazine of Verse 
Edited by Harriet Monroe 

August 1922 



These Are but Words 

by Muna Lee 
Talk from the Dust 

by Elizabeth Roberts 
Song Nets 

by Hilda Conkling 



232 East Erie Street, Chicago 
93.00 per Year Sintfle Numbers 25c 

tized by Google 



Digitiz 



.> 



Digiti 



gitized by Google 



PoBTRY Is great— just that I 

Edgar BomtmM, of the Lomisvitte Courier-JomrnaL 

Vol. XX No. V 

POETRY for AUGUST, 1922 

PAGE 

These Are but Words Muna Lee 235 

The Sonnet— I-IX 
At Night Jessica Nelson North 242 

The Sleeper — First Aut^^n — Dream»-;-Suddenly — Bogie — 

Boatman — ^To the Man Who Loves Twilight 
Your Hands — From the Telephone . . Florence Ripley Mastin 247 
Beginning and End Louise Bogan 248 

Elders — Resolve — Knowledge — Leave-taking — To a Dead 

Lover 
Poems from the Chinese . . Translated by Louise S. Hammond 252 
Summer Phases Katherine Wisner McCluskey 254 

The SpAe— Transit— A Parable— Wholly Happy 
Talk from the Dust Elizabeth Madox Roberts 257 

The Sky— Numbers— Autumn— The People— A Beautiful 

Lady — ^August Night 
Song Nets Hilda Conkling 261 

Snow Morning — ^What I Said — ^Little Green Bermuda Poem — 

When Moonlight Falls — ^Elsa — Cloudy Pansy — Field-mouse — 

"I Wondered and I Wondered" 

Nature the Source H M. 266 

On Translating Chinese Poetry I Eunice Tietjens 268 

Reviews: 


Red Wrath H. M. 276 

Calm Waters Marion Strobel 280 

From the Nineties to the Present .... Royall Snow 282 
Correspondence: 

Paris Notes Jean Catel 287 

Notes and Books Received 291, 292 



Indurive ftuiy mbtcriptlon ntes. In the United Stotes, If cxioo. Cnba and 

irican PowtMlons. $3.00 net; In Cinedi, $3.15 net; In aD other ooonimet in tlie 

Poital Union, $3.25 act. Sntend as eecond-chiii matter Nov. 15. 1912. at the 



Manosertpta moat be aoeompanied by n itamped and leif-addreMed envelope, 

In the Unit '" " ^ ' 

.J3.00net:1nCanB 

I, $3.25 nt- 

poet-oflfee, at O^eaao. DL. nader Act of Ifafch 3. 1079. 

Published monthly at 331 East Erie St.» Chicago, 111. 
C0PfritkH022,hyHanUtM9m9$. AU rigkU r e u rwti. 




Boedy 



Vol. XX 
No. V 
A Magazine of VetBc 



AUGUST 1922 



THESE ARE BUT WORDS 

THE SONNET 

WHAT Other form were worthy of your praise 
But this lute-voice, mocking the centuries 
In many a silvery phrase that hallowed is 
By love not faltering with lengthening days? 
A lute that I have little worth to raise 
And little skill to sound — yet not amiss 
Your love may find it, since my heart in this 
Only one thing for your heart only says. 

These are no perfect blossoms I offer you, 
No rose whose crimson cup all longing slakes. 
Not moonflowers, sunflowers, flowers rich of hue, 


Nor silver lilies mystical with dew — 

No more than bluets, blown when April takes 

Millions of them to make one meadow blue. 



I have been happy: let the falcon fly, 
And follow swiftly where the light wings whir — 
Let him bring down the reckless wanderer. 
Snatch back that es^er rapture from the sky! 
And I have been contented: let me cry 
My discontent, until, like reeds astir 
Before the swift, the tragic whisperer. 
Broken are these frail dreams that satisfy! 

I have khown laughter: make me blind with tears. 

\ have loved silence: make me deaf with sound. 

For every joy set vengeful grief above. 

I will not shrink before the threatening years; 

I will not falter, I will not give ground; 

And I will love as you would have me love! 

II 

I have a thousand pictures of the sea — 

Snatches of song and things that travellers say. 

I know its shimmering from green to gray; 

At dawn and sunset it is plain to me. 

Like something known and loved for years will be 


Muna Lee 



That sight of it when I shall come some day 
Where little waves and great waves war and play. 
And little winds and great winds fly out free. 

Of love I had no pictures: love would come 
Like any casual guest whom I could greet 
Serenely, and serenely let depart — 
Love, that came like fire and struck me dumb, 
That came like wind and swept mc from my feet. 
That came like lightning shattering my heart. 

Ill 

Life of itself will be cruel and hard enough: 
There will be loss and pain enough to bear; 
Battles to wage, sorrow and tears to share. 
We must know grief — the bitter taste thereof; 
Must mark the Shadow towering above; 
Must shut our eyes to gain the strength to dare. 
And force tired hearts to face the noise and glare 
Though it is dusk and silence that we love. 

Life has no need of stones that we might heap 
To build up walls between; no need of tears 
That we seek out and proudly make our own. 
O my beloved, since we have alone 
These brief hours granted from the hurrying years. 
Be patient — life itself will make us weep! 

IV 

There have been many Junes with larkspur blowing. 
Many Octobers with crimson-berried haws, 
When from my heart regret like smoke withdraws, 
Wreath after wreath, to watch the sunsets glowing, 
And see tall poplars make so brave a showing 
Against pale skies at dusk. There were no flaws 
To mar the summer for me; never pause 
In my delight for winds and waters flowing. 

Yet was all beauty beauty uncompleted. 
Vaguely perceived, not truly heard and seen; 
Or seen as are the hills with mist between, 
Or heard as song thin echoes have repeated; 
Until you gave earth meaning, giving me 
The love that lifts the heart to hear and see. 



You have not known the autumns I have known. 

November for you has bloomed as bright as spring. 

With tropic suns to glow and birds to sing. 

And flowers more vivid than mine in August blown. 

You have made, beside, those autumns half your own 

That come with ice and sleet and wind, to sting 

The blood itself to ruddy blossoming — 

Such autumns as the bleak North knows alone. 


" Muna Lee 

My autumns are merely quiet, and they show 

Straight trees that are bared alike of leaves and snow — 

Yet it is only thus you can know the trees. 

Love proud enough to forego bloom and song. 

To strip the boughs of foliage; bare and strong 

To bide your judgment, would be most like these. 

VI 

It would be easy to say: ''The moon and lake 
Made wizardry — how could we see aright? 
That was a world unreal in silver light. 
And we were lovers for the moment's sake. 
It was youth spoke in us, quick to mistake ' 
Earth-lamp for dawn, the mirage for true sight; 
Hailing a hill-crest as the long-sought height. 
Swearing such oaths as honors us to break." 

That would be easiest: then no regret 
Could chill a heart grown happy to forget, 
Nor touch a soul that sophistry sufficed. 
There was a man once, in a hall of trial. 
Thrice before cock-crow uttered such denial — 
And knows forever that he denied the Christ! 

VII 

I make no question of your right to go — 
Rain and swift lightning, thunder and the sea, 


POETRY? A Magazine oj Verse 

Sand and dust and ashes are less free! 

Follow all paths that wings and spread sails know; 

Unheralded you came, and even so 

If so you will, may you take leave of me. 

Yours is your life, and what you will shall be. 

I ask no question: hasten or be slow! 

But I who would not hold you — I who give 
Your freedom to you with no word to say; 
And, watching quietly, with my prayers all dumb, 
Speed you to any life you choose to live — 
Shall ask God's self, incredulous, some day. 
Why in the name of Christ He let you come! 

VIII 

No love can quite forego the battle-field; 
Since life is struggle, and love and life are one. 
No soul is quiet and sheltered enough to shun 
The tireless foes at work to make love yield. 
Not flowers and samite, but lance and shield 
Were dower of love; not wreath but gonfalon; 
And while the bitter struggle is unwon 
Not even to faith is all the truth revealed. 

Each heart its own most dreaded foe must meet; 
Each heart its own conspiracies must lay. 
And fight what it finds hardest to defeat. 
Mine is it to meet Doubt in serried mass 


Muna Lee 

Stronger and subtler with each toilsome day; 
Yet steel my soul to swear, "They shall not pass." 

IX 

It will be easy to love you when I am dead — 
Shadowed from light and shut away from sound, 
Held deeper than the wild roots underground, 
Where nothing can be changed and no more said. 
All will be uttered then: beyond the dread 
Of failure in you or me, I shall have found 
Most perfect quietness to fold me round. 
Where I can dream while all Time's years are sped. 

But now Life roars about me like a sea. 
Sears me like flame, is thunder in my ears. 
There is no time for song, no space for tears. 
And every vision has forsaken me. 
In a world earthquake-shaken, lightning-charred, 
Love is the hardest where all things are hard. 

Muna Lee 


AT NIGHT 

THE SLEEPER 

Night, O heavy breather in the surf of sleep. 
What is that strange and rosy slenderness 
You hold against your heart with so much tenderness? 

The Sleeper. It is my wife I hold — 
I love her more than life. 
She has hair of bronze and gold. 
And in twin strands divides it; 
It lies across her bosom surplice-wise. 
This I know to be true though darkness hides it. 

Night. Now all things false dissolve beneath the moon! 
This is a sheaf of whispering dreams you hold. 
Bound by the tawny sinews of your arm. 
They nod together with plumes of bronze and gold. 
They breathe and are warm; 
They speak together in a sibilant tune. 

The Sleeper. It is my own wife. 
Her mouthy that is merry and wise, 
Is shut; and the lids are shut that cover 
Her faithful eyes. 

Night. A sheaf of dreams — hush ! 

The First Dream. She is untrue, 

Brother and brother! 
This one is new — 
Where is the other? 

T242] 



 



Jessica Nelson North 



The Second Dream. 



The Third Dream. 



The Fourth Dream. 



I hear men say 
He had ceased to love her. 
Even today 

His voice can move her. 
I have seen her tremble 
When she meets his eyes. 
She is deft with lies. 
She is (|uick to dissemble. 
How is this done. 
Brother and brother. 
To sleep with one 
And dream of another? 



Night. A sheaf of dreams, of dreams 
The Sleeper. My wife. 
My wife. 



FIRST AUTUMN 

All in our pearl-pale window 
The moon's aroma hung. 

My love and I together 
Our heads upon one pillow, 
Looked out where an elm upflung 
A branch like a peacock feather. 

Heigho, first autumn weather! 

DREAMS 

You curve your body into a vibrant ball, 
Dead drunk with sleep. 
I have no part in your slumber-scheme at all, 
I cannot strike that deep. 

You hold me insecurely in your life 

As a sand-dune holds' trees. 

I say, "It is five months — I am your wife." 

What shadow facts are these? 

I put my hand into your breast. It lies 

Unowned, apart. 

While more familiar hands . . . and lips . . . and eyes 

Press close around your heart. 



SUDDENLY 

We have a gray room. The walls are gray and bare. 
I have hung pictures and set flowers there. 
I have made curtains with wide and snowy hem 
For our tiny windows to make the best of them. 

You look at me. Your look is still and gray. 
Your look is cool and dim and far away. 
I cannot open the stubborn husks that shut 
Your heart away like the kernel in a nut. 


Jessica Nelson North 



I am afraid of what is in your heart. 

I mus,t probe deep; I must tear your mood apart. 

Suddenly like a rocket, unaware, 

Your eyes blossom and flare! 



BOGIE 

The black rain settles in our empty block. 

The drunken street-lamps leer with sidelong eyes, 

Dim and unholy. 

Old newspapers, grown restless in the gutter, 

With flap and flutter 

Rise and subside and rise. 

It is half-past-twelve-o'clock. 

The night — ^goes — slowly. 

I am awake again. I cannot sleep. 

I light the lamp again, and draw the shutter. 

I light the lamp against the feet that creep, 

The sounds that mutter. 

I draw the shutter against the lids that peep. 

Something goes crouching at the dripping flank 
Of the broken wall! Something in tatters slips 
Down alleys dank! 

Something from door to door before the rain 
Dodges and whines! Something with twisting lips 
Terribly smiles outside my shuttered pane! 



BOATMAN 



Boatman, leaning on your pole on the Secret River, 
Will you tarry for a soul who never knew a lover? 
She is very young and cold, her beauty makes me shiver. 
I will give you coins of gold to take her softly over. 



TO THE MAN WHO LOVES TWILIGHT 

Why do you go along the street caressing with quiet eyes 
Gray walls, bleak houses, and the dull wet skies? 
Have all things gray your blessing? 

We do not love your twilight, God and I. 

He pelts the rainy heaven 

With gorgeous autumn, — hangs the dripping trees 

With yellow apples of Hesperides 

In lines 

Sweetly uneven. 

Loops every sodden fence with scarlet vines. . . . 

And where you sit 

Sufficient to yourself, hugging the gloom, 
I prance with rustling silk and candles lit 
To make an orgy in our quiet room. 

Jessica Nelson North 




YOUR HANDS 

Hands, your hands, quite calm now 

At the day's end, 

You are not delicately molded, not exquisite. 

Not gentle always. . . • 

You are scarred, 
With broken lines — 
Sultry lines of passion. 
There are grotesques in you, 
Like forests after fire. 

You hold valleys of renunciation. 
And crags shaken by the storm. 
That only faiths like wild goats know. 

Yet now rises, within that dark repose. 
Beauty, as she comes hooded at twilight. . . 

Ah, do not touch me, yet . . . 



FROM THE TELEPHONE 

Out of the dark cup 

Your voice broke like a flower. 

It trembled, swaying on its taut stem. 

The caress in its touch 

Made my eyes close. 

Florence Ripley Mastin 
BEGINNING AND END 

ELDERS 

At night the moon shakes the bright dice of the water; 
And the elders, their flower light as broken snow upon the 

bushy 
Repeat the circle of the moon. 

Within the month 

Black fruit breaks from the white flower. 

The black-wheeled berries turn 

Weighing the boughs over the road. 

There is no harvest. 

Heavy to withering, the black wheels bend 

Ripe for the mouths of chance lovers. 

Or birds. 

Twigs show again in the quick cleavage of season and 

season. 
The elders sag over the powdery road-bank, 
As though they bore, and it were too much, . 
The seed of the year beyond the year. 



RESOLVE 

So that I shall no longer tarnishwith my finge^-s 
The bright steel of your power, 


Louise Bogan 



I shall be hardened against you, 
A shield tightened upon its rim. 

A stern oval to be pierced by no weapon. 
Metal stretched and shaped against you. 
For a long time I shall go 
Spanned by the round of my strength. 

Changeless, in spite of change, 

My resolve undefeated; 

Though now I see the evening moon, soon to wane, 

Stand clearly and alone in the early dark. 

Above the stirring spindles of the leaves. 



KNOWLEDGE 



Now that I know 
That passion warms little 
Of flesh in the mold. 
And treasure is brittle, 

ril lie here and learn 
How, over their ground. 
Trees make a long shadow 
And a light sound. 



LEAVE-TARING 

I do not know where cither of us can turn 

Just at first, wakii^ from the sleep of each other. 

I do not know how we can bear 

The river struck by the gold plummet of the moon, 

Or many trees shaken together in the darkness. 

We shall wish not to be alone 

And that love were not dispersed and set free — 

Though you defeat me, 

And I be heavy upon you. 

But like earth heaped over the heart 

Is love grown perfect. 

Like a shell over the beat of life 

Is love perfect to the last. 

So let it be the same 

Whether we turn to the dark or to the kiss of another; 

Let us know this for leavetaking, 

That I may not be heavy upon you, 

That you may blind me no more. 



TO A DEAD LOVER 

The dark is thrown 

Back from the brightness, like hair 

Cast over a shoulder. 

I am alone, 


Louise Bogan 

Four years older; 

Like the chairs and the walls 

Which I once watched brighten 

With you beside me. I was to waken 

Never like this, whatever came or was taken. 

The stalk grows, the year beats on the wind. 
Apples come, and the month for their fall. 
The bark spreads, the roots tighten. 
Though today be the last 
Or tomorrow all, 
You will not mind. 

That I may not remember 

Does not matter. 

I shall not be with you again. 

What we knew, even now 

Must scatter 

And be ruined, and blow 

Like dust in the rain. 

You have been dead a long season 
And have less than desire 
Who were lover with lover; 
And I have life — that old reason 
To wait for what comes, 
To leave what is over. 

Louise Bogan 

POEMS FROM THE CHINESE 

In the original syllabic and rhyme scheme^ to accompany the 
Chinese chanting tunes. 

AN OLD man's song OF SPRING 

By Seng Dji-Nan (Sung Dynasty) 

Among the trees I may yet 
Enjoy the day at sunset; 

For willow winds are not cold, 
Apricot rains are not wet. 



SEEKING THE HERMIT JN VAIN 

By Gia Dao (Tang Dynasty) 



** Gone to gather herbs" — 
So they say of you. 

But in cloud-girt hills, 
What am I to do? 



ON BEING DENIED ADMITTANCE TO A FRIEND S GARDEN 

By Yeh Shih {Sung Dynasty) 

Although your gate bar my way. 
You cannot check the spring's play; 

For free above your proud wall 
There hangs one apricot spray. 


Louise S. Hammond 

THE SUDDEN COMING OF SPRING 

By Cheng Hao (Sung Dynasty) 

Scant clouds just flake the noon sky; 
By willowed streamlets stroll I. 

But men know not my heart's joy, 
And say, "Old fool, the hours fly." 

NIGHT-TIME IN SPRING 

By fFang An-Shih (Sung Dynasty) 

Silence reigns where sound has been; 
Chill the breeze, half soft, half keen; 

While the moon through sleepless hours 
Shifts dark blossoms up the screen. 

Translated by Louise S. Hammond 



[253J 



 


SUMMER PHASES 



THE SPREE 



In the uplift of spring 
Earth had high thoughts in trees; 
Smiling her apple-blossoms^ 
Blushing her peach-petals. 
Delicate as a sprite. 

Now she sprawls. 

Making loose gestures with spreading vines; 
Guffawing vegetables and fruits — 
Harlequin melons, Punchinello squashes — 
Hiccoughing cucumbers, stuttering tomatoes. 
She is mad-drunk with summer. 

Soon she'll lie still, 

Decently covered with the leaf-brown quilt. 

She'll give loud, gusty yawns, then sleep. 

Jeered at by rains, pitied by snow; 

And wake to chastened, stiff sobriety. 

TRANSIT 

The purple shadow clings with desperate will 
Tightly to the granite hill; 
Tries to grow to it, 
I try, beloved, dear, 


Katherine Wisner McCJuskey 

To carve me out one solid moment here — 
Afraid of cruel winds to blow, 
Winds implacable that know 
Shadows go. 

Winds strip shadows off from hills. 

Signalled by cloudy change above. 

An instant's whim, and death may harry love. 

Should it sever you from me, 

I drift, I drift. 

Agnostic of reality. 



A PARABLE 

The magnolia bud 

Loosens her white garments 

With exquisite reserve. 

So love unfolds 

While delicate mysteries, 

Like odors. 

Subtly escape. 

The white magnolia. 
Of lucent petals 
Textured like woman skin. 
Crumples to leather 
Limp and brown. 
Binding a story told. 




 

WHOLLY HAPPY 

This is the Sabbath Day. 

I keep it my own way. 

I do not need to go to church to pray. 

Feeling and being me 
Is good as good can be. 
I claim my own identity. 

I am as happy as a flower 
Perfuming its one hour 
With a sweet sense of power. 

I am unfettered as a bee 

That cleaves a tiny path, but free. 

Choosing an orange-blossoming tree. 

Making my honey as it does, 
I feel as holy as saint ever was. 
This is my perfume, prayer and buzz. 

Katherine fFisner McCluskey 




TALK FROM THE DUST 

THE SKY 

I saw a shadow on the ground> 
And heard a bluejay going by. 

A shadow went across the ground. 
And I looked up and saw the sky. 

It hung up on the poplar tree, 
But while I looked it did not stay; 

It gave a tiny sqrt of jerk 
And moved a little bit away. 

And farther on and farther on 

It moved and never seemed to stop. 

I think it must be tied with chains, 
And something pulls it from the top. 

It never has come down again; 

And every time I look to see. 
The sky is always slipping back 

And getting far away from me. 



NUMBERS 

When I can count the numbers far 
And know all the figures that there are, 

Then I'll know everything, and I 

Can know about the ground and the sky, 

And all the little bugs I see; 

And rU count the leaves on the poplar tree, 

And all the days that ever can be. 

ril know all the cows and sheep that pass, 
And rU know all the grass, 

And all the places far away; 

And rU know everything some day. 



AUTUMN 

Dick and Will and Charles and I 

Were playing it was election day; 
And I was running for president, 

And Dick was a band that was going to play. 

And Charles and Will were a street parade. 
But Clarence came, and said that he 

Was going to run for president, 
And I could run for school-trustee. 

He made some flags for Charles and Will, 
And a badge to go on Dickie's coat. 

He stood some cornstalks by the fence 
And had them for the men that vote. 


Elizabeth Madox Roberts 

Then he climbed on a box and made a speech 
To the cornstalk men that were in a row. 

It was all about the Dem-o-crats, 
And "I de-fy any man to show*'; 

And "I de-fy any man to say", 

And all about "It's a big disgrace". 
He spoke his speech out very loud 

And shook his fist in a cornstalk's face. 



THE PEOPLE 

The ants are walking under the ground. 
And the pigeons are flying over the steeple; 
And in between are the people. 



A BEAUTIFUL LADY 

We like to listen to her dress; 

It makes a whisper by her feet. 
Her little pointed shoes are gray; 

She hardly lets them touch the street. 

Sometimes she has a crumpled fan. 

Her hat is silvered on the crown, 
And there are roses by the brim 

That nod and tremble up and down. 

She conies along the pavement walk, 

And in a moment she is gone. 
She hardly ever looks at us, 

But once she smiled and looked at John. 

And so we run to see her pass 
And watch her through the fence, and I 

Can hear the others whispering, 
"Miss Josephine is going by." 

AUGUST NIGHT 

We had to wait for the heat to pass. 
And I was lying on the grass. 

While Mother sat outside the door. 
And I saw how many stars there were. 

Beyond the tree, beyond the air, 

And more and more were always there. 

So many that I think they must 
Be sprinkled on the sky like dust. 

A dust is coming through the sky! 
And I felt myself begin to cry. 

So many of them and so small — 
Suppose I cannot know them all. 

Elizabeth Madox Roberts 


SONG NETS 

Song netSy 

I weave you with all my love. 

You glitter like pearls and rubies ^ 

In you I catch songs like butterflies. 

You go past my reaching hand 

With a thin gauzy floating^ 

And the songs are caught 

Before they Jade away. 

Last night 

My hand caught a song 

Of pines and quiet rivers: 

I shall keep it forever. 



SNOW MORNING 

Morning is a picture again, 

With snow-pufFed branches 

Out of the wind; 

With the sky caught like a blue feather 

In the butternut tree. 

I cannot see the world behind the snow; 

But when I look into my mind, 

There, with all its people and colors, 

The world sits smiling 

Quite warm and cosy. 

WHAT I SAID 

Lilies of the valley, 

Bell-shaped moments clustered, 

Doves of time — ^little white doves 

Through the dusky sunset-colored air 

Set free, 

I stroke your wings, 

I stroke your folded wings. 


LITTLE GREEN BERMUDA POEM 

Green water of waves 
On the Bermuda beaches. 
White coral roads running away, 
Pink shells waiting for me to come, 

shall come some day. 
How would it sound to be there alone 
And hear the Atlantic Ocean 
Crash on bright rocks? 

This island is a great rainbow 

That lasts forever; 

People go and come 

And the waves forget them. 

I see the island turn and turn — 

A soap-bubble with rainbows drifting down, 

A rainbow ball turning . . . 

Always light, always glitter looking through. 


Hilda Conkling 



My poem that began with a green wave 
Has broken into colors. 



WHEN MOONLIGHT FALLS 

When moonlight falls on the water, 

It is like fingers touching the chords of a harp 

On a misty day. 

When moonlight strikes the water 

I cannot get it into my poem — 

I only hear the tinkle of ripplings of light. 

When I see the water's fingers and the moon's rays 

Intertwined, 

I think of all the words I love to hear 

And try to find words white enough 

For such shining. 

ELSA 

My sister stood on a hilltop 

Looking toward the sea. 

The wind was in her bronze-colored hair; 

She was an image 

On a broken wave . . . 

Foam was at her feet. 

So for a moment she wavered 

And was lovely: 

And I remember her. 



CLOUDY-PANSY 

Wandering down a dusty road> 

I met a gypsy. 

She might have dropped out of the trees. 

She had a green kerchief 

And a blue velvet skirt, 

A lavender cape 

And a gold locket: 

Green shoes on the feet 

That trod the powdery road 

To the marble-floored Vermont river 

Thinking as it goes along . . . 



FIELD-MOUSE 

Little brown field-mouse 

Hiding when the plough goes by. 

Timid creature that you are, 

Wild thing, 

Were you once in the forest? — 

Did you move to the fields? 

In your brown cloak 

You gather grain 

For your secret meals; 

You will build a house of earth 

The way you remember. 

From a baby up to your full-grown feeling 


Hilda Conkling 



You have run about the field, 
As other field-mice will run about 
When another century has come 
Like a cloud. 



Wind waves the reeds by the river, 
Grey sky lids the leaden water, 
Ducks fly low across the water, 
Three flying — one quacks sadly. 

Grey are the sky and the water, 
Grey the lost ribbons of reed-beds, 
Small in the silence a black boat 
Floats upon wide pale mirrors. 



Go fight, you fools! Tear up the earth with strife 
And spill each other's guts upon the field; 

Serve unto death the men you served in life 
So that their wide dominions may not yield. 

Stand by the flag — the lie that s^U allures; 

Lay down your lives for land you do not own, 
And give unto a war that is not yours 

Your gory tithe of mangled flesh and bone. 

But whether it be yours to fall or kill. 
You must not pause to question why nor where. 

You see the tiny crosses on that hill? 
It took all those to make one millionaire. 

It was for him the seas of blood were shed, 

That fields were razed and cities lit the sky; 
And now he comes to chortle o'er the dead — 
. The condor Thing for whom the millions die. 

The bugle screams, the cannons cease to roar. 

"Enough! enough! God give us peace again." 
The rats, the maggots and the Lords of War 

Are fat to bursting from their meal of men. 



Ti8 time, I think, by Wenlock town 

The golden broom should blow; 
The hawthorne, sprinkled up and down 

Should charge the land with snow. 
Spring will not wait the loiterer's time 

Who keeps so long away; 
So others wear the broom, and climb 

The hedgerows heaped with may. 
Oh, tarnish late on Wenlock Edge, 

Gold that I never see; 

Lie long, high snowdrift in the hedge 
That will not shower on me. 




RIDGE PEOPLE 


MY COUNTRY 



THEY were my people, 
And this country was my country. 

Deep ravines 

Send strange shadows into the valley. 

Rock ridges 

Bulwark returning ferns and flowers. 

Rock towers 

Watch the invading shadows. 

Hills mother children. 

Hills watch while children sleep. 

Fathomed in coulees, 
The spirit water-falls 
Say all there is to say. 


 



A NATIVE 

There ain't no poetry 

Like these middlin' hills 

And a slow stream gurglin* over stones. 

Them pines has lived four hundred years 

And asked nothin' of no one. 

Straight and tall and strong — 

Nothin' crooked about a pine. 

Religion, I call it. 

Pointing to the sky 

And slinging incense free. 

Did you ever hear 

A cedar valley moan a dirge 

Or sing an anthem ? 

nothin' — somethin' 

It ain't worth nothin' as land goes, 

And yet it's somethin'. 

Kinda nice — 

A hill of boulders 

Smilin' in the sun. 

I only took it because 'twas cheap. 

I wasn't one of them 

That had the earnin' guts 

To pick and choose. 

My girl and I have worked 





To coax the crops around these stones. 

She was pretty once — 

Lord, now her bones stick out 

Like ridge-poles in a tent. 

I ain't complainin'. 

The land — 

She'd say it wasn't any good 

Except to hold the world together. 

It's held her 

And me. 




Jim Burgantine said, 
"If any other man had tried 
To put over a plug hat 
In this Western burg 
He'd a been egged." 

Didn't follow fashion. 
He brought his hat from Massachusetts- 
It was a good hat 
And lasted forty years. 
For the matter of that, 
Eight months of the calendar 
He didn't wear a hat; 
He never did unnecessary things. 

He split a cracker 

If the scales tipped over a pound. 

He split a cracker 

If the scales tipped under a pound. 

When a neighbor was sick 

He sat up nights, 

And took the orphans home. 

Twenty-five thousand dollars. 
Earned in his corner grocery. 
Was scattered about the country 
Among the struggling farmers. 
Without trying to collect. 

He never said unnecessary words — 

Fe was a quiet man. 

No tombstone 

Shouts his name above the sod. 

grand-dad's bluff 

I knelt all day, 

Grand-dad, 

Pleading with you — 

But you had nothing to say. 

Night fell, 

And a message came 

Through your ravines. 



It did not speak either, 

But I heard it pass among the leaves of the trees. 

I drank it through my nostrils 

As one drinks wine through the mouth, 

And it tingled to the finger-tips of my spirit. 

I came to you, Grand-dad, with my heart. 

God bless you. Grand-dad. 

IN MIST 

When you can see the ground's breath. 

And the sky goes muggy 

And drops before the world 

Like a perspiring window-glass; 

When beasts and humans creep to cover 

And the steam-boats speak fog-language'; 

The farm buildings sit still 

Folding their hands 

As if they hadn't a thing in the world to do. 

A chimney's belch smudges into nothing; 

The earth's breath noses around the roots of trees; 

Heaven-mist seeps through branches 

And wraps the country's heart. 

LIGHT MAGIC 

The valley curves like a bridge-span to the sky. 

Blue granite stew-pans spill pink begonias along the road. 

The town hall, blazing red, focuses the red stubble of the 

fields 
Which stretch away to gold-stacked corn-stalks, 
And Wisconsin hills — piled cubes of red and yellow. 
The sunset catches the landscape in layers. 
Its amber floats a banner of pastels around the town. 



LATE AUTUMN IN THE HILLS 

A flock of birds 

Spurts down the trail of autumn. 

Bare hills 

Wrap fog-blankets about them, 

And nod. . . . 

A whirl of wind 

Scatters wild rice over the lake. 

There is a shake of snow in the air. 
My boat moors in the sedges. 

My hand 

Droops over the side of the boat. 

My fingers 

Touch a lotus pod. 

The seeds rattle in the husk. 

Autumjf^s anchored. 





THE SEASON 



It is mating time — 
How can I go gipsying? 

It is planting time — 
How can I go adventuring? 

It is harvest time — 

In the twilight the camp-fire smoulders; 

On the hearth-stone 

Ashes hold memories. 

It is dying time — 
And the unknown road. 



ANTAGONISMS 

LAUGHTER 

See! 

I thrust at you laughter — 

Clusters of pomegranate in the sun. 

See! 

I dangle clusters of red sun-ripened laughter 

Before your eyes, that are colorless 

Like the eyes of the fishes. 

What are you peering at, 

Sallow-face? 

Your hand — 

It is limp and clammy; 

It has never clutched at a thing 

Strongly. 

Those pale pinched lips of yours 

Have never blossomed under kisses, 

Have never whispered little words 

Luminous with tenderness. 

Rigid one! 

My laughter. 

Let it shake you like a wind — 

Red wind 

Tearing to shreds 

Your pale hypocrisy. 



My laughter, 

Let it thaw 

Those boulders of black ice — 

Your hard moralities, 

Your bleak utilities — 

And sow violets in their place. 

There is laughter ringing softly 

From the golden shell of the sky. 

There is laughter ringing in the rills 

That come tripping down the bronze and purple hillside 

Insolently. 

Trees are swaying to and fro. 

Laughter in the rustle and the flitter of their leaves. 

And the air is warm and tremulous with laughter 

Rising from the lips that lie 

Mute beneath tombstones. 

Deaf one, 

Listen 

To the scarlet wind! 

There are sobs in the wind. 



INTO THESE THINGS 

The grasp of their hands has grown cold. 
Furnaces needed 
Red fire. 



Their little souls, 

Their cowardly cramped souls — 

Bigness went 

To steel and to stone. 

Slow and feeble their breath. 
Do you hear the white steam 
Panting? 

There is no music in their hearts. 
Engines know rhythm, 
Engines make 
Loudness. 

If their eyes are 
Without longing, 
Do not numbers 
Create themselves? 

And if their lips show not 

The deep proud curve of passion, 

Are not cities 

Passionate? 

Furnaces, steel towers, engines, cities — 

And the pale-eyed people crawling. 

Emptied 

Into these things. 



PASSING 

I am tired of roads. 

I am tired of the going — the going; 

And I am tired of passing people. 

In the east a narrow streak of gold 
And the flutter of wings of the little desires. 
Bleakness of snow in the north 
And in the south the taste of ashes on hot lips. 
Westward a loneliness. 

Roads over sand, and roads over snow, and roads across 
rivers. 

I am tired of roads. 

I am tired of the going — the going; 

And I am tired of passing people. 

I am tired of passing them on the glistening pavements 

under the lamplight 
And in the places where you order things to eat. 
I am tired of passing them at noon under the flat stare of 

the sun 
And in the street-cars, the elevated trains and the taxis. 
Passing glances and feet passing — 
Feet of six million people passing and gliding by, 
Shuflling and jostling by — 
Passing — passing ; 
And those that pass on the screen in the movies, 

And the people that pass — slowly — hurriedly — 
With a half-caught gest through the pages of books. 

I am tired of the winds that hasten by, 

And of the little waves that skip and never once look back, 

And of stars coming and going. 

Fleeting glimpses — 

Hands fluttering past like autumn leaves. . . . 

I am tired of roads. 

I am tired of the going — the going; 

And I am tired of passing people. 



HILL SPEECH 

I listened to the hills as they spoke 
At nightfall. 

I listened to the haughty calm flowing of line speech, 

And to vehement words 

Jagged and bitten into the sky face. 

I saw hieroglyphs scrawled on a pale wall of sky 

With fingers of granite. 

There was motion gripping the masses 

Urging and waving 

Onward. 

I heard cadences of hill speech 



Falling and rising 

Softly, 

With soothing interference. 

And there was one standing alone on the smoldering 

horizon, 
Standing aloof and detached 
Always; 

Saying "I" and "I" and "I," 
Answering "No" and "No" and "No"— 
Always — 

To the biting words and to the flowing line speech, 
And to the hieroglyphs scrawled with fingers of granite. 

There was one 

Saying "No" 

To the dull gray abysses 

Of sky and of sea — 

Saying "No" 

To the masses. . . . 



TWO SONNETS 


She bore the smear of insult on her face, 
And heard the ruffian voices, and the din 
Of penny horns and whistles that had been 

Her heart; a,nd she knew only this disgrace — 

That one had dressed her in a ragged gown. 

Caesar had been met in various ways; 

Like thought too vast to feel or to erase, 
She knew the hosts of Rome were sweeping down 

In various fashions Caesar had been met — 
With crimson violence or more brilliant lies, 

The poisoned fang, or chain of chariot. 

She did not choose, but slain by her surprise, 

She could not see the choice that waited yet — 
The veiled, derisive, plebeian disguise. 

JEST 

In a gutter between wind-bitten glaciers, 
A little man stands, blowing upon a toy. 

Is he not mad — is he not audacious, 
In such a curious place, in such employ.^ 

The wind's blue insult swells upon his face. 
A whisking hunger, like a mouse at bay, 




Has cowed his eyes which, vaguely in disgrace, 
Bear up the heavy menace of Broadway. 

A dim presentiment of an awful hoax 
Scalded his heart and simmered to his feet — 

The secret jest that counted off the strokes 
Of hours men spent at various tasks secrete, 

That made of some of them quite obvious jokes, 
And saved for others labors more discreet. 




ANGUISH 

Pain is cutting through my heart. 

Like a thin knife, 
With the keen abiding smart 

Men call life. 

Pillowed cool in marble state. 

Ah, let me sleep; 
And afar from love or hate 

Bury me deep. 


REFLECTIONS 

DUET 

(/ sing with myself) 
Out of my sorrow 
ril build a stair, 
And every tomorrow 
Will climb to me there; 

With ashes of yesterday 

In its hair. 

My fortune is made 
Of a stab in the side, 
My debts are paid 
In pennies of pride: 

Little red coins 

In a heart I hide. 

The stones that I eat 
Are ripe for my needs; 
My cup is complete 
With the dregs of deeds. 

Clear are the notes 

Of my broken reeds. 

I carry my pack 
Of aches and stings, 
Light with the lack 
Of all good things; 






But not on my tacky 
Because of my wings! 



AT THE HOSPITAL FOR THE INSANE 

They said to me: "We are not crazy, dear! 

But they are mad . . . and so they keep us here." 

I thought: "We are all mad! — in this walled place, 
And out beyond, and through all time and space; 
Save he who looks his madness in the face!" 



SONG OVERHEARD 

I wrote your name within my heart 

Most carefully — 

I never could remember names or faces; 

And then, one day, 

I lost my heart along the shining places. 

I must have let it fall. 

Plucking a flower I did not want 

And listening to a bird I did not see: 

Now would I call — 

And you would answer me. 

Do hearts have wings? 

I am so careless about losing things. 

KIND FATE 

You Strike at hearts of gentle ways; 
And in their grief they give you praise. 

Once, once you struck at me . . . 

And will not strike again. 

You do not like to bruise your hands 

On hearts that hoard their bright hard pain. 

THE STRONGHOLD 

Here he lies 

Under the solemn stones, 

Secure from Life — a little while; 

Old Death, 

With his ready smile, 

Busy among his bones. 

LOOKING ON 

I urged my mind against my will: 
My will shook like a rocking wall, 
But did not fall; 

My mind was like a wind-swept tree, 
And neither knew the victory. 

I dashed my mind against my will: 
They did not break or bend or spill, 
Bqt in my heart the songs grew still. 






A TRUTH ABOUT A LIE 

I lied, trusting you knew 

I could not lie to you. 

Beloved friend, I lied and am forgiven; but I 

Cannot forgive that you believed my lie. 

COUPLETS 

Forest Fires 

Summer is burning! From trees' red crown 
Ashes of June pour hotly down. 

Night of Stars 
They crowded round me more and more; 
I had to shove to shut the door. 

Ascent 

Mountains take too much time. 
Start at the top and climb. 

Reproach 

You gave me wings to fly; 
Then took away my sky. 

Down to the Heights 

In the deep valleys, and deeper still, * 

I found my heights . . . against my will. 


SHADOW SONGS 

LAMENTATION 

Chrysanthemums and late roses 

And the plane-leafs fall — 

All that is left us now. 

Hoarsely the flower-girls cry, 

Pale shake the street-lamp lights; 

Chilled gusts come pufling by, 

Sigh the poor year away. 

All that is left us now 

Regrets without perfume; dead thoughts; 

Chrysanthemums, and late roses. 


VIRGIN MOON 

Having chattered out 

The overbrimming of their light hearts, 

When the old moon had traveled over the housetops 

Far enough to dangle dancing shadows of leaves 

Across their bed, 

Veils of silence also were let down. 

And they slept, virgin beside virgin. 

The whisper of leaves outside the window 

Filled the room 

Long after the moon had trailed 

Her net of shadow-boughs across their dreams 

And was gone. 






AN UNPOSTED LETTER 

How bitter must the smile 
Of the wise Future be 
Behind her veil! 

letter of last year, 
Can my hopes and aims, 

Like moons, 
Have changed so? 
Those dead desires, 
Like shriveled fruits, 
Hang, shamed. 
On the bough of time. 

NOCTURNE 

The veil of light slipped 
From the sky : 
Only greyness. 
And in the valley 
One home light — 
Not mine. 

1 most remember, then. 
Shadows of boughs 
Lattice-wise falling 

On white walls 
Of my home 
Beneath the moon. 


A TRIFOLIATE 

BEAUTY 

Over beauty I am a weeping willow. 

I begged of God to grant me a look at beauty, 

And He sent me traveling a billion years 

To come to this world. 

I came my way an empty vessel, longing for beauty. 

I shall go my way fulfilled, glorifying beauty. 

When I look on beauty 

I secure a day's provision; 

Thus I accumulate food for another billion years. 

When I see beauty 

It propels wheels in me, 

And puts me in communication with God instantly, 

To thank Him that I am arrived. 

My only grief in life is to see a thing without beauty. 
Over beauty I am a weeping willow. 

MY WEDDING 

My adopted little sisty-dreams. 
As soon as they heard 
The wedding news of their brother, 
Shouted: "Brother, our brother. 
You have cared for and sustained us 
All our painful lives. 



For this hour we have been waiting, 

The hour of our culmination. 

Brother, you were betrothed when you were born." 

Then they danced alone to the garden 

To gather star-daisies. 

. Now comes the lady of my heart 
In her purple-bordered, lightning-colored gown. 
The maiden Day, in whom I breathe, comes 
With the sun-bouquet at her breast; 
Led by my sister-dreams, the maids of honor. 
And Life, the best man, leads me to her. 

The pagan musicians Ocean and Wind! 

Ocean the pianist, with jeweled and manicured fingers, 

Thunders and pounds the wide-ranged key-board of the 

shore; 
And the Wind, with hair unbound. 
Holding the violin-woods under her chin. 
Thrills my bride and her maids of honor. 
And Life my best man, 
And me. 

IN YOUR EVES 

To M. //. 
Never before did I dare 
To look in your eyes. 
To see one's self 
In love's mystic eyes 

Is leading 

Life in Paradise. 

(Creator dreamed 

And looked deep in space. 

Then Being, the grace of His dream, 

Began to evolve. 

Thus He became famous, 

And God is His name.) 

When the light from my eyes 

Falls in yours. 

Immortal songs will take course — 

Tuneful songs, the grace of my dreams. 




TRIAD 

In the church of St. PierrCy August, igi8 

Old music wove its beauty through each word 
Which echoed from the chancel down the nave. 

Old beauty of fled twilights stained each beam, 
Carved like the fingers of some soul in prayer. 

A woman veiled in black knelt on the stone. 
The beauty of old suffering on her face. 



A WALKING POEM 

I believe there is moving more than colored jackets 
Down the street among the city rackets. 
I do not think the sun-rain on the corner wall 
Is all. 

I cannot think the swirl is much 

More than a little touch 

Of soulsy to steady to an equipoise 

Their private thunderings, t)ie subterranean noise. 

For I have gathered scowl and elbow-thrust 
And glint of pupil of the eye; there must, 
I think, be lashing foam in canyons under there, 
And this a heavy silence on the little empty air. 

I do not think her ankles mincing through, 
And round smile, are the flowers that we thought we knew. 
Red jacket — stealthy lioness yawning in the wood, 
And stealthy passion creeping in the blood. 

The sun moves, and the colors of the air. 

I think each canyon-river keeps its flowing there 

Within the deepest constancy. 

Call then the sun and jackets pageantry. 



POEMS 

THE LITTLE DEITY ALONE IN THE DESERT 

My life is here 

A contemplation of slow days and distant women. 

Women standing in the sky-line 
As if about to turn into their shawls and leave 
their doorways. 

The illimitable movement of my hand 

Across the desert 

Contrives against their motions and my being. 

LATE WINTER 

The duller plains of dawn 

near this 
Gray 'dobe of bare fruit-trees — 

hesitant 
A foot upon the sill. 


A REQUIEM FOR THE MEMORY OF BEES 

Lake Michigan 
A brown flowering tree 

Was but a farther spinning of 
the sprinkled blackbirds. 



A woman walking. 

The evening dying. 

Her dress among low blossoms. 

Among low blossoms 
Lake water humming. 



CHICAGO SPRING 

Before returning to Santa Fe 

I walk on the streets 
Before nightfall — 
The lake clear and still 
Between young leaves. 

My body is gentle 

As the light on the pavement. 

My fingers play on the air 

Like evening wind running in leaves. 

But there is no one — 
Only return, 

Only old roads of last summer, 
An old fence like dead leaves. 

The hand of God 
Is heavier than mountains. 
It stands on the air 
Like an odor. 


OLD SPRING 

The flowering crabtrees 
Have melted like the twilights. 

Here a brown road 
Dull amid bark shadows 
And an old man walking — 

And between the woods 

The dandelions 

Like dried scattered leaves. 

But in my country 
The spring is old. 
The violet and red 
Are laid in earth, 
Will not be lost. 

And I there, standing, 
Or moving slowly. 

THE SILENT DAYS 

Here men go 

In and out of doors 

And women stand — 

Beneath dry trees 

A child drifts and is still. 



With brevity 

Men break a bitter bread. 

My books 

Are fallen leaves — 

I, unidentified. 

As books passed by at will. 



LAMENT, BESIDE AN ACEQUIA, FOR THE WIFE OF 
AWA-TSIREH 

Two caballeros, 
Smooth in the valley, 
Laughed — their horses bucked. 
The summer foaming. 

San Ildefonso 
In colors 
Faint as dust — 
Flower-dripping dancers — 
One cannot think 
So far away. 

And thinking, 
Women die, 
O Awa-tsireh! 

The faded roads 
May never move. 



"the fragile season' 



The scent of summer thins, 
The air grows cold. 

One walks alone 

And chafes one's hands. 

The fainter aspens 
Thin to air. 

The dawn 
Is frost on roads. 

This ending of the year 
Is like the lacy ending 
of a last year's leaf 
Turned up in silence. 

Air gives way to cold. 






On Translating Chinese Poetry 

at once the work of a sinologue and a poet." They are 
in rhymed verse as direct as Sara Teasdale's lyrics, and 
to me often very beautiful. Here, for instance, is her 
version of one of the odes: 

How say they that the Ho is wide. 
When I could ford it if I tried? 
How say they Sung is far away, 
When I can see it every day? 

Yet must indeed the Ho be deep 
When I have never dared to leap; 
And since I am content to stay, 
Sung must be very far away. 

If one bears in mind the fact that the original is rhymed 
and patterned, does Miss Lowell's new free-verse version, 
with its American colloquialisms, seem an improvement? 

Who says the Ho is wide? 

Why, one little reed can bridge it. 

Who says that Sung is far? 
I stand on tiptoe and see it. 

Who says the Ho is wide? 

Why, the smallest boat cannot enter. 

Who says that Sung is far? 

It takes not a morning to reach it. 

L. Cranmer-Byng, with his A Lute of Jade and A Feast 
of Lanterns y struck a more popular chord, and it is perhaps 
a personal matter that they do not move me as the 
Waddell translations do. They are partially rhymed and 
partially unrhymed. To me it seems that they are not 

quite one thing or the other, neither very good English 
verse nor very scrupulous translations. 

Another interesting, though slightly Latinized, volume 
is Whitall's rendering of the French versions of Judith 
Gautier's Le Liure de Jade. And we have had other 
sorts of translations: the airy snatches of Ezra Pound 
some years ago, who chose a single image that pleased 
him from a long poem and gave us that only; the fantasies 
of E. Powys Mathers, so over-decorated as to be genuinely 
dishonest, the dreadful doggerel of W. A. P. Martin, the 
trite and wearisome mouthings of Charles Budd, not to 
mention the numerous "interpretations." 

Then came Arthur Waley's admirable translations, at 
once so simple and so scholarly, carrying with them an 
instant conviction of authenticity. This, we felt, was 
the substance and spirit of these old poets at last. 

Yet, such is the carping nature of mankind, we no 
sooner had so much than we began to wish for the magic 
also. For Mr. Waley's word sense, excellent as it is, 
still falls short of the ultimate subtlety of magic. It is 
probably with the hope of restoring this magic that Amy 
Lowell with Florence Ayscough, and Witter Bynner 
with Dr. Kiang Kang-hu, have now taken up the work. 
Miss Lowell's book is a welcome addition, since it gives 
us many new and charming poems in a contemporary 
technique. Yet I for one cannot quite trust Miss Lowell. 
She has given us so many racial interpretations — ^Japa- 
nese, Indian and others — which were all essentially herself, 


On Translating Chinese Poetry 

that when I find that this too reads like her own poems 
I doubt their essentially Chinese quality. She has 
surely too vivid a personality to make a good translator. 
Mr. Bynner's book is not yet out, but from the examples 
I have seen it promises to be the most satisfying of the 
free-verse translations in the matter of magic. 

Such, roughly, is the history of the recent attempts 
to translate Chinese classical poetry into English. Let 
me give, for comparison, three different versions of the 
same poem. It is by the Lady Pan Chieh-Yu, chief 
favorite of the emperor who ruled China B. C. 36-32 and 
was sent him with a fan by the lady when she had been 
supplanted by a younger rival. The first translation is 
by Giles, in his history of Chinese literature: 

O fair white silk, fresh from the weaver's loom. 
Clear as the frost, bright as the winter snow — 
See! friendship fashions out of thee a fan. 
Round as the round moon shines in heaven above; 
At home, abroad, a close companion thou. 
Stirring at every move the grateful gale. 
And yet I fear — ah me! — that autumn chills, 
Gx>ling the dying summer's torrid rage, 
Will see thee laid neglected on the shelf. 
All thought of bygone days like them bygone. 



O fan of white silk 

clear as fist on the grass-blade. 
You also are laid aside. 





 

Glazed silk, newly cut, smooth, glittering, white. 

As white, as clear, even as frost and snow. 

Perfectly fashioned into a fan, 

Round, round, like the brilliant moon. 

Treasured in my Lord's sleeve, taken out, put in — 

Wave it, shake it, and a little wind flies from it. 

How often I fear the autumn season's coming. 

And the fierce, cold wind that scatters the blazing heat. 

Discarded, passed by, laid in a box alone; 

Such a little time, and the thing of love cast off. 