 Poems by Rodney Jones 
 
 
ON THE BEARING OF WAITRESSES

 Always I thought they suffered, the way they huffed 
through the Benzedrine light of waffle houses, 
hustling trays of omelets, gossiping by the grill, 
or pruning passes like the too prodigal buds of roses, 
and I imagined each come home to a trailer court, 
the yard of bricked-in violets, the younger sister 
pregnant and petulant at her manicure, the mother 
with her white Bible, the father sullen in his corner. 
Wasn’t that the code they telegraphed in smirks? 
And wasn’t this disgrace, to be public and obliged, 
observed like germs or despots about to be debunked?  Unlikely brides, apostles in the gospel of stereotypes, 
their future was out there beyond the parked trucks, 
between the beer joints and the sexless church, 
the images we’d learned from hayseed troubadours— perfume, grease, and the rending of polarizing loves. 

But here in this men’s place, they preserved a faint 
decorum of women and, when they had shuffled past us, 
settled in that realm where the brain approximates 
names and rounds off the figures under uniforms. 
Not to be honored or despised, but to walk as spies would, 
with almost alien poise in the imperium of our disregard, 
to go on steadily, even on the night of the miscarriage, 
to glide, quick smile, at the periphery of appetite. 
And always I had seen them listening, as time brought 
and sent them, hovering and pivoting as the late 
orders turned strange, blue garden, brown wave. Spit 
in the salad, wet sucks wrung into soup, and this happened. 
One Sunday morning in a truckstop in Bristol, Virginia, 
a rouged and pancaked half-Filipino waitress 
with hair dyed the color of puffed wheat and mulberries 
singled me out of the crowd of would-be bikers 
and drunken husbands guzzling coffee to sober up 
in time to cart their disgusted wives and children 
down the long street to the First Methodist Church. 
Because I had a face she trusted, she had me wait 
that last tatter of unlawful night that hung there 
and hung there like some cast-off underthing 
caught on the spikes of a cemetery’s wrought-iron fence. 
And what I had waited for was no charm of flesh, 
not the hard seasoning of luck, or work, or desire, b
ut all morning, in the sericea by the filthy city lake, 
I suffered her frightened lie, how she was wanted 
in Washington by the CIA, in Vegas by the FBI— while time shook us like locks that would not break. 
And I did not speak, though she kept pausing to look 
back across one shoulder, as though she were needed 
in the trees, but waxing her slow paragraphs into 
chapters, filling the air with her glamour and her shame.    


WHERE I WAS A KING 
Maybe a sin, indecent for sure--dope, 
The storekeeper called it. Everyone agreed 
That Manuel Lawrence, who drank 
Through the side of his mouth, squinting 
And chortling with pleasure, was hooked; 
Furthermore, Aunt Brenda, 
Who was so religious that she made 
Her daughters bathe with their panties on, 
Had dubbed it "toy likker, fool thing," 
And so might I be. Holding the bottle 
Out to the light, watching it bristle. 
Watching the slow spume of bubbles  
Die, I asked myself, could it be alive?

When they electrocuted Edwin Dockery, H
e sat there like a steaming, breathing 
Bolt, the green muscles in his arms 
Strained at the chair's black straps, 
The little finger of his right hand leapt up, 
But the charge rose, the four minutes 
And twenty-five hundred volts of his death, 
Which in another month will be 
Thirty-five years old. So the drink fizzed 
With the promise of mixtures to come.

There it was. If the Hard-Shell 
Baptists of Alabama are good and content 
That the monster has died, so am I. 
I swallowed. Sweet darkness, one thing 
Led to another, the usual life, waking 
Sometimes lost, dried blood in the ear, 
Police gabbling in a strange language. 
How else would I ever gauge 
How pleasure might end, walking 
Past midnight in the vague direction 
Of music? I am never satisfied.
 


Brains 
When I moved in with her, I thought now 
I won't have to look it up: rubidium, Calvin Trillin, the fourth- longest river in Brazil. 
The lunar mountain ranges 
zoomed in. Zygotes and paramecia 
made themselves known. She 
could cook a mean boeuf bourguignon, 
then rank the leading authorities 
on the aspiration of the h 
or mystical tenses of Latin verbs. 
But you are so creative, there's 
not a creative bone in my body, 
she would say, when I insisted 
before friends we had recently met 
that not I but she was the brain. 
Now that she is gone, 
now I can feel secure, one 
of my thoughts sending another 
down through the foggy 
databases, the fractures, 
and the unions. Here boy, 
I whistle to the dog of my thoughts. 
I am thinking how, 
before I lived with her, 
I was known as the brain, 
but I valued the heart more than the brain, 
and more than the heart, the flag of the erogenous zones— 
loving me was like patriotism, 
but I was not fit to live with her. 
I knew, when she began to chant 
and burn incense to the Asian saints,  I did not know her secret anything. 
Still, I had ideas, insights, 
a brain like the world's mute, 
lightning-soldered, accidental 
intelligence. With that same brain now I hold our ill-starred, 
incompatible visions 
of happiness and tragedy. 
Yet when I need to know 
how spinnerets work 
or the distance to Alpha Centauri, 
I think of her, not for long 
or at any depth, or what 
she was, but the last 
compliment that means anything 
is the compliment to memory.
 

The Language of Love 
 
It has taken thirty-five years to be this confident 
of what happens between the noun and the verb. 

Eventually, love goes. The image. Then the thought. 
No? Then you are still alive. Only a little. And then,

I do not mean to depress you. Men have to hear 
before they see. Sacred vows. Dropped shirts.

Women do not speak to men. They are overheard.  Sadness mounts people. Around the burn-scar high

on one thigh, the body of the beloved will vanish. 
And the come cries and salt hair-smells of lovemaking.

Secret fiction, holy matrimony, longest short story 
the troth two lovers pledge to one another is none

of the president’s business, let him say what he wants.  
He is no good with words. Ask any true lesbian.

He should take a poetry workshop with Adrienne Rich. 
He should try using the world less and words more
  

 THE BRIDGE

 These fulsome nouns, these abbreviations of air, 
Are not real, but two of them may fit a small man 
I knew in high school who, seeing an accident, 
Stopped one day, leapt over a mangled guardrail, 
Took a mother and two children from a flooded creek, 
And lifted them back to the world. In the dark, 
I do not know, there is a saying, but he pulled 
Them each up a tree, which was not the tree of life 
But a stooped Alabama willow, flew three times 
From the edge of that narrow bridge as though 
From the selfless shore of a miracle, and came back 
To the false name of a real man, Arthur Peavahouse. 
He could sink a set shot from thirty feet. One night 
I watched him field a punt and scat behind a wall 
Of blockers like a butterfly hovering an outhouse. He did not love the crashing of bodies. He 
Did not know that mother and her three children 
But went down one huge breath to their darkness. 
There is no name for that place, you cannot 
Find them following a white chain of bubbles 
Down the muddy water of these words. But I saw 
Where the rail sheared from the bridge—which is 
Not real since it was replaced by a wider bridge. 
Arthur Peavahouse weighed a hundred and twenty pounds. 
Because he ran well in the broken field, men 
Said he was afraid. I remember him best 
At a laboratory table, holding a test tube 
Up to the light, arranging equations like facts, 
But the school is air over a parking lot. You 
Are too far from that valley for it to come 
All the way true, although it is not real. 
Not two miles from that bridge, one afternoon 
In March, in 1967, one of my great-uncles, 
Clyde Maples, a farmer and a commissioner of roads, 
And his neighbor, whose name I have forgotten, 
Pulled more than a hundred crappies off three 
Stickups in that creek—though the creek is not 
Real and the valley is a valley of words. You  Would need Clyde Maples to find Arthur Peavahouse, 
And you would need Clyde Maples’ side yard 
Of roadgraders and bulldozers to get even part 
Of Clyde Maples, need him like the crappies 
Needed those stickups in the creek to tell them 
Where they were. Every spring that creek 
Darkens with the runoff of hog lots and barns, 
Spreading sloughs, obscuring sorghum and corn. 
On blind backwater full schoolbuses roll 
Down buried roads. Arthur Peavahouse was smart 
To run from the huge tackles and unthinking 
To throw himself into that roiling water 
And test the reality of his arms and lungs. 
Many times I have thought everything I said 
Or thought was a lie, moving some blame or credit 
By changing a name, even the color of a lip or bush, 
But whenever I think of the lie that stands for truth, 
I think of Arthur Peavahouse, and not his good name, 
But his deciding, as that car settled to the bottom, 
To break free and live for at least one more moment 
Upward toward light and the country of words 
While the other child, the one he could not save, 
Shrugged behind him in the unbreakable harness.  


 GROUND SENSE

 Because I have known many women 
Who are dead, I try to think of fields 
As holy places. Whether we plow them

Or let them to weeds and sunlight, 
Those are the best places for grief, 
If only that they perform the peace

We come to, the feeling without fingers, 
The hearing without ears, the seeing 
Without eyes. Isn’t heaven just this

Unbearable presence under leaves? 
I had thought so. I had believed 
At times in a meadow and at other

Times in a wood where we’d emerge 
No longer ourselves, but reduced 
To many small things that we could

Not presume to know, except as my  
Friend’s wife begins to disappear, 
He feels no solvent in all the earth,

And me, far off, still amateur at grief. 
Walking the creek behind the house, 
I cross to the old homeplace, find

A scattering of chimney rocks, the 
Seeds my grandmother watered, the 
Human lifetime of middle-aged trees.  


 A DEFENSE OF POETRY

 If abstract identity, philosophy’s silhouette, authorless, quoted, 
and italicized, governs by committee the moments 
of a mutinying, multitudinous self, then I’m lost.

But let a semi loaded with bridge girders come barreling 
down on me, I’m in a nanosecond propelled 
into the singular, fleet and unequivocal as a deer’s thought.

As to the relevance of poetry in our time, I delay and listen 
to the distances: John Fahey’s “West Coast Blues,” a truck 
backing up, hammers, crows in their perennial discussion of moles.

My rage began at forty. The unstirred person, the third-person 
void, the you of accusations and reprisals, visited me.  
Many nights we sang together; you don’t even exist.

In print, a little later is the closest we come to now: the turn 
in the line ahead and behind; the voice, slower than the brain; 
and the brain, slower than the black chanterelle.

The first time I left the South I thought I sighted 
in an Indiana truckstop both Anne Sexton 
and John Frederick Nims, but poetry makes a little dent like a dart.

It’s the solo most hold inside the breath as indigestible truth. 
For backup singers, there’s the mumbling of the absolutes. 
Du-bop of rain and kinking heat. La-la of oblivion.

Sheep-bleat and stone-shift and pack-choir. 
There is a sense beyond words that runs through them: 
animal evidence like fur in a fence, especially valuable now,

self-visited as we are, self-celebrated, self-ameliorated, 
and self-sustained, with the very kit of our inner weathers, 
with migraine, our pain du jour, our bread of suffering.

If poetry is no good to you, why pretend it can enlighten you? 
Why trouble the things you have heard or seen written 
when you can look at the mandrone tree?
 

BEAUTIFUL CHILD 

Because I looked out as I was looked upon 
(Blue-eyed under the golden corm of ringlets 
That my mother could not bring herself 
To have the barber shear from my head) 
I began to see, as adults approached me, 
That hunger a young woman must feel 
When a lover seizes one breast too long 
On the ideal nipple-balm of the tongue. 
When they lifted me and launched me 
Ceilingward, I seemed to hang there years, 
A satellite in the orbit of their affections, 
Spinning near the rainspot continents 
And the light globe freckled with flies. 
I could smell the week-old syrupy sweat 
And the kerosene of many colognes, 
Could see the veined eyes and the teeth 
Dotted with shreds of lettuce and meat. 
When I touched down, one of them 
Would hold me to the torch of a beard 
And goose my underarms until I screamed. 
Another would rescue me, but leave 
On my cheek the heart-mark of her kiss. 
So I began, at three, to push them away. 
There was no ceremony and few words, 
But like a woman who has let a man go too far 
And, in one night's moodiness, steps
 Out of a parked car and walks home alone, 
I came suddenly to my life, and they  
Did not begrudge me, but turned back 
To the things they had done before-- 
The squeaking bed, the voices late at night. 
Mornings I'd crawl beneath the house, Dreaming how poignantly tragic my death 
Would seem, but, having thought about it, 
I happily took myself into the darkness 
Of the underground, where I was king.
 
 

THE BOOMERS TAKE THE FIELD

It takes a long time to forgive 
heroism or beauty. 
And then the young girl 
in the old song owns a plot 
in the memorial gardens, 
a brow full of Botox, 
and a lover with Viagra.

The laps of the mythical 
parents of World War Two 
and the Great Depression 
have lithified to granite, 
yet we remain childish. 
In our fifties, we study ourselves 
studying their violence.

Do they forgive us our graduations? 
They got dark early— 
so elegant in photographs, 
but thin from hunger 
as often as vanity. 
We were lucky, they said. 
We should have lived in the thirties.

No one could find a kid. 
Occasionally they'd find 
a little person and beat it 
for impersonating a kid. 
And if it cried, 
they'd beat it again, harder, 
and give it a pair of Lucky Strikes



 
THE STATE-LINE STRIPPER 
I got lost. 
At a family picnic for the employees 
of Martha White Self-Rising Flour. 

Two lovers found me down by the Tennessee River, 
a little fat girl 
crying into the lichen on a stone's face, 
and took me to the grandstand—

Embarrassing— I got lost. And then I lost my fear. 
Strangers and high places 
and nightly publishing myself 
naked except for a fireman's hat. 
I danced and Jehovah's Witnesses 
came unglued in the parking lot.

My creation was like the earth's. 
In the beginning there was shame, 
then the body after shame, 
dangerous happiness— 
If I could remember how I got here 
I wouldn't be lost.

Yet my body recommends me. 
All that I promised that I would not do, I did. 
I got over my fear of darkness 
when it seemed to me anything out there 
would probably be better 
than what shone here in the light
 